mhGAP Intervention Guide
for mental, neurological and substance use disorders
in non-specialized health settings
Version 2.0
Mental Health Gap Action Programme

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’
products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended
mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and sub- by the World Health Organization in preference to others of
stance use disorders in non-specialized health settings: mental a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions
health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) – version 2.0. excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by
initial capital letters.
1.Mental Disorders - prevention and control. 2.Nervous System
Diseases. 3.Psychotic Disorders. 4.Substance-Related Disorders. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World
5.Guideline. I.World Health Organization. Health Organization to verify the information contained in this
publication. However, the published material is being distributed
ISBN 978 92 4 154979 0 (NLM classification: WM 140) without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The
responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies
with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization
© World Health Organization 2016 be liable for damages arising from its use.
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization Printed in Italy
are available on the WHO website (http://www.who.int) or can
be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20
Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791
3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int).
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO
publications –whether for sale or for non-commercial
distribution– should be addressed to WHO Press through the
WHO website (http://www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_
form/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material
in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent
approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full
agreement.
wire possition

mhGAP Intervention Guide
for mental, neurological and substance use disorders
in non-specialized health settings
Version 2.0
Mental Health Gap Action Programme

ii
mhGAP-IG 2.0 Table of Contents
Preface iii ECP Essential Care & Practice 5
Acknowledgements iv MC Master Chart 16
Introduction 1 DEP Depression 19
How to use the mhGAP-IG Version 2.0 3
PSY Psychoses 33
EPI Epilepsy 51
CMH Child & Adolescent Mental & Behavioural Disorders 69
DEM Dementia 93
SUB Disorders due to Substance Use 105
SUI Self-harm / Suicide 131
OTH Other Significant Mental Health Complaints 141
Implementation of mhGAP-IG 151
Glossary 159

mhGAP-IG 2.0 Preface
Mental, neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders are highly prevalent, interventions in non-specialized health-care settings. Since its release in 2010, mhGAP-IG
accounting for a large burden of disease and disability globally. There remains a has been widely used by a range of stakeholders including ministries of health, academic
wide gap between available health systems capacity and resources, what is urgently institutions, NGOs and other philanthropic foundations and researchers to scale-up
needed, and what is available to reduce the burden. Nearly 1 in 10 people have a mental health services. mhGAP-IG Version 1.0 is being used in more than 90 countries in
mental health disorder, but only 1% of the global health workforce provides mental all WHO regions and mhGAP materials were translated into more than 20 languages,
health care. MNS disorders interfere, in substantial ways, with the ability of children to including the six UN official languages.
learn and the ability of adults to function in families, at work, and in society at large.
Five years after the initial launch of the guide, updates to the mhGAP guidelines
Recognizing the imperative to provide services for people with MNS disorders and their based on emerging literature was performed and revised mhGAP guidelines were
carers, and to bridge the gap between available resources and the large need for these published in 2015. We are now pleased to present mhGAP-IG Version 2.0 which not only
services, the WHO Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse launched the reflects these updates but also extensive feedback from the field to enhance the guide
Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) in 2008. The key objectives of mhGAP in its clarity and usability.
are to reinforce the commitment of governments, international organizations and other
stakeholders to increase the allocation of financial and human resources for care It is our hope that this guide will continue to be a key technical tool to deliver
of MNS disorders and to achieve much higher coverage with key interventions in low- care for people with MNS disorders around the world and lead us closer to achieving
and middle-income countries. Through these objectives, mhGAP provides evidence-based the goal of Universal Health Coverage.
guidance and tools to advance toward achieving the targets of the Comprehensive
Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2020.
Shekhar Saxena
In 2010, the mhGAP Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) for MNS disorders for non- Director, Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
specialized health settings was developed to assist in implementation of mhGAP. A World Health Organization
simple technical tool based on the mhGAP guidelines, mhGAP-IG presents integrated
management of priority MNS conditions using protocols for clinical decision-making.
There is a widely shared but false notion that all mental health interventions are complex
and can only be delivered by highly specialized staff. Research in recent years has
demonstrated the feasibility of delivery of pharmacological and psychosocial
iii

iv
mhGAP-IG 2.0 Acknowledgements
Vision and Conceptualization WHO Regional and Country Offices Technical Reviewers
Nazneen Anwar, Regional Office for South East Asia; Inputs and feedback were received from the following
Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health Florence Baingana, WHO Sierra Leone; Andrea Bruni, Regional international experts for the development of updated mhGAP
and Substance Abuse, WHO. Office for Americas; Anderson Chimusoro, WHO Zimbabwe; Guidelines and/or mhGAP-IG Version 2.0.
Manuel de Lara, WHO Turkey; Bahtygul Karriyeva, WHO
Turkmenistan; R Kesavan, WHO Liberia; Devora Kestel, Regional
Albert Akpalu, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana
Office for Americas; Lars Foddgard Moller, Regional Office for
Project Coordination and Editing and Epilepsy Society of Ghana, Ghana; Sophia Achab*, WHO
Europe; Maristela Goldnadel Monteiro, Regional Office for
Collaborating Centre, University of Geneva/Hôpitaux Universitaires
Americas; Matthijs Muijen, Regional Office for Europe; Julius
de Genève (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland; Emiliano Albanese*,
Tarun Dua, Nicolas Clark, Neerja Chowdhary, Alexandra Muron, WHO Liberia; Sebastiana Da Gama Nkomo, Regional
WHO Collaborating Centre, University of Geneva/HUG, Geneva,
Fleischmann, Fahmy Hanna, Chiara Servili, Mark van Ommeren. Office for Africa; Jorge Jacinto Rodriguez, Regional Office for
Americas; Khalid Saeed, Regional Office for Eastern Mediterranean; Switzerland; Robert Ali*, Drug and Alcohol Services South Australia
Caroline Saye, WHO Liberia; Yutaro Setoya, WHO Fiji; Xiao (DASSA), WHO Collaborating Centre for the Treatment of Drug and
Sobel, Regional Office for Western Pacific; Saydah Taylor, Alcohol Problems, University of Adelaide, Australia; Fredrick Altice,
Contribution
WHO Liberia; Salma Tlili, WHO Guinea; Xiangdong Wang, Yale University School of Medicine and School of Public Health,
Regional Office for Western Pacific; Eyad Yanes, WHO Syria. New Haven, USA; José Ayuso-Mateos, Universidad Autonoma de
Valuable material, help and advice was received from technical
Madrid and CIBER, Spain; Corrado Barbui*, WHO Collaborating
staff at WHO headquarters, staff from WHO regional and country
Key International Experts
Centre for Research and Training in Mental Health and Service
offices and many international experts. These contributions have
Lindsey America-Simms, Kenneth Carswell, Elizabeth Centeno-
Evaluation, University of Verona, Italy; Gretchen Birbeck, Michigan
been vital to the update of mhGAP Guidelines and/or develop-
Tablante, Melissa Harper, Sutapa Howlader, Kavitha Kolappa,
ment of the mhGAP-IG Version 2.0. State University, Michigan, USA; Anja Busse, United Nations Office
Laura Pacione, Archana A. Patel, Allie Sharma, Marieke van
on Drugs and Crime, Vienna, Austria; Vladimir Carli*, National
Regteren Altena.
WHO Headquarters Centre for Suicide Research and Prevention of Mental Ill-Health
Valentina Baltag, John Beard, Alexander Butchart, Dan Chisholm, Administrative Support (NASP), Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; Sudipto Chatterjee*,
Nathalie Drew, Jane Ferguson, Berit Kieselbach, Nicola Magrini, Adeline Loo, Cecilia Ophelia Riano. Parivartan Trust and Sangath, India; Dixon Chibanda, University
Chris Mikton, Eyerusalem Kebede Negussie, Alana Officer, of Zimbabwe, Friendship Bench Project, Harare, Zimbabwe;
Anne Margriet Pot, Vladimir Poznyak, Geoffrey Reed, Dag Rekve, Interns Janice Cooper, Carter Center, Liberia; Wihelmus (Pim) Cuijpers*,
David Ross, Jotheeswaran Amuthavalli Thiyagarajan, Farnoosh Ali, Lakshmi Chandrasekaran, Paul Christiansen, Vrije University, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Gauri Divan, Sangath,
Wilson Were. Anais Collin, Aislinne Freeman, Anna Fruehauf, Ali Haidar, Goa, India; Christopher Dowrick*, Institute of Psychology,
Huw Jarvis, Steven Ma, Emma Mew, Elise Paul, Charlotte Phillips, Health and Society, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK; Joshua
Pooja Pradeeb, Matthew Schreiber.
Duncan, Building Back better Project, CBM, Sierra Leone; Julian
Eaton*, CBM International, Togo and London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, UK; Rabih El Chammay, Ministry of Health,

Beirut, Lebanon; Peter Hughes, Institute of Psychiatry Psychology of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India; Vandad Sharifi Senejani, Jordan; Raul Ayala, Mexico; Namsenmoh Aymar, Central African
and Neuroscience King’s College, London, UK; Asma Humayun*, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Republic; Madhur Basnet, Nepal; Gertrude Bayona, Uganda; Rose
Meditrina Health Care, Islamabad, Pakistan; Gabriel Ivbijaro*, Iran; Kolou Simliwa Dassa*, Ministry of Health, Lome, Togo; Leslie Beaugrand, Sierra Leone; Tadu Bezu, Ethiopia; Gaurav Bhattarai,
Wood Street Medical Centre, London, UK; Nathalie Jette*, Snider, Peace in Practice, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Chhit Sophal, Nepal; Jihane Bou Sleiman, Lebanon; Brian Byekwaso, Uganda;
Hotchkiss Brain Institute and O’Brien Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health, Cambodia; Jessica Maria-Violanda Spagnolo, Jules Claude Casumba, South Sudan; Alice Clement, Nigeria;
University of Calgary, Canada; Lynne Jones, National Health School of Public Health, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada; Gretel Acevedo de Pinzon, Panama; Barkon Dwah, Liberia;
Service, UK; Marc Laporta, Department of Psychiatry, McGill Emmanuel Streel, Public Mental Health and Substance Use Mufumba Emmanuel, Uganda; Olivia Gabula, Uganda; Kamal
Montreal, WHO PAHO Collaborating Center for Research and Consultant, Belgium; Scott Stroup, Columbia University College of Gautam, Nepal; Renee Gerritzen, Nepal; Shree Ram Ghimire,
Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Canada; Physicians and Surgeons, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New Nepal; Sudip Ghimre, Nepal; Ijeh Ter Godwin, Nigeria; Kebeh
Anita Marini, Cittadinanza NGO, Rimini, Italy; Farrah Mateen, York, USA; Athula Sumathipala, Keele University, UK; Kiran Thakur, Selma Gorpudolo, Liberia; Teen K. Grace, Nigeria; Georgina
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA; Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, USA; Rangaswamy Thara, Grundy-Campbell, UK and Turkey; Esubalew Haile, South Sudan;
Zhao Min, Shanghai* Drug Abuse Treatment Centre, Shanghai Schizophrenia Research Foundation, India; Graham Thornicroft* Tayseer Hassoon, Syria; Mahmoud Hegazy, Turkey; Zeinab Hijazi,
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Charles Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s Lebanon; Fred Kangawo, Uganda; Sylvester Katontoka, Zambia;
Newton*, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kilifi, Kenya; Olayinka College London, UK; Mark Tomlinson, Stellenbosch University, Fred Kiyuba, Uganda; Humphrey Kofie, Ghana; Moussa Kolie,
Omigbodun*, Centre for Child and Adolescent Mental Health South Africa; Nyan Tun, Yangon General Hospital, Myanmar; Guinea; Samer Laila, Turkey; Richard Luvaluka, Uganda; Paul
(CCAMH), University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria; Akwasi Carmen Valle, CBM, Freetown, Sierra Leone; Pieter Ventevogel, Lwevola, Uganda; Scovia Makoma, Uganda; João Marçal-Grilo,
Osei*, Ministry of Health, Accra, Ghana; Amrita Parekh, Dasra, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva, UK; Soo Cecilia Mbaidoove, Nigeria; Colette McInerney, Laos;
Mumbai, India; Alfredo Pemjean*, Departamento de Salud Mental, Switzerland; Inka Weissbecker*, International Medical Corps, Saeed Nadia, UK; Ruth Nakachwa, Uganda; Juliet Namuganza,
Ministerio de Salud, Santiago, Chile; Hemamali Perera, Faculty of Washington, USA; Mohammad Taghi Yasamy, Geneva, Switzerland; Uganda; Emily Namulondo, Uganda; Margaret Namusobya,
Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka; Michael Phillips, Lakshmi Vijayakumar*, SNEHA, Suicide Prevention Centre, Chennai, Uganda; Amada N. Ndorbor, Liberia; Sheila Ndyanabangi, Uganda;
Suicide Research and Prevention Center and Research Methods India; Abe Wassie, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine Joel Ngbede, Nigeria; Fred Nkotami, Uganda; Zacharia Nongo,
Consulting Center, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Addis Ababa University and Amanuel Hospital, Ethiopia. Nigeria; Emeka Nwefoh, Nigeria; Philip Ode, Nigeria; Mary Ogezi,
Jiaotong University School of Medicine and WHO Collaborating Nigeria; Martha Okpoto, Nigeria; Sagun Ballav Pant, Nepal;
Center for Research and Training in Suicide Prevention, Beijing * mhGAP Guideline Update Development Group Members Monica Peverga, Nigeria; Mapa H Puloka, Kingdom of Tonga;
Huilongguan Hospital, Beijing, China; Martin Prince*, Institute of Muhannad Ramadan, Jordan; Nick Rose, UK; Brigid Ryan, Australia;
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College, London, Joseph s. Quoi, Liberia; Nidhal Saadoon, Turkey; Latifa Saleh,
UK; Atif Rahman,* Institute of Psychology, Health & Society, Additional inputs were provided by following reviewers Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; Dawda Samba, Gambia; Nseizere
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK; Richard Rawson*, University through contributing to pilot testing, feedback or focus Mitala Shem, Uganda; Michel Soufia, Lebanon; Shadrach J.
of California at Los Angeles Integrated Substance Abuse Programs, group discussions: Suborzu II, Liberia; Wafika Tafran, Syria; Angie Tarr Nyankoon,
California, USA; Tahilia Rebello, Columbia University, USA; Rajesh Liberia; Lilas Taqi, Turkey; Yanibo Terhemen C., Nigeria; Nongo
Sagar, All India institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India; Ley Helal Uddin Ahmed, Bangladesh; Suzan Akwii Otto, Uganda; Terseer, Nigeria; Samnieng Thammavong, Laos; Manivone
Sander, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Alison Schafer, Robinah Alambuya, Uganda; Latifa Saleh Al Harbi, Saudi Arabia; Thikeo, Laos; Joshua Tusaba, Uganda; Chanthala Vinthasai, Laos;
World Vision, Nairobi, Kenya; Kunnukattil S Shaji, Government Alaa Iddin Al Masri, Jordan; Laila Alnawaz, Turkey; Ebtisam Al Anna Walder, Sierra Leone; Abdulwas Yusufi, Ethiopia.
Medical College, Thrissur, India; Pratap Sharan*, All India Institute Rowdhan, Saudi Arabia; Roseline Aposu, Nigeria; Manar Awwad,
v

vi
The following experts contributed to reviewing the University, Netherlands; Mark Keezer, University College London, Production Team
updated mhGAP guidelines as external reviewers: UK; Nicole Lee, Turning Point, Australia; Valentina Lemmi,
London School of Economics, UK; Harriet MacMillan, McMaster Graphic design and layout: Erica Lefstad
Atalay Alem, Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia; Laura Amato, University, Canada; Carlos Martinez, Ministry of Health, Printing Coordination: Pascale Broisin, Frédérique Claudie
Cochrane Collaborative Drugs and Alcohol Review Group, Italy; Argentina; Daniel Maggin, University of Illinois, USA; Silvia Rodin, WHO, Geneva.
Satinder Aneja, Lady Hardinge Medical College, India; Pierre Minozzi, Cochrane Collaborative Drugs and Alcohol Review
Bastin, Clinique Beaulieu, Switzerland; Gayle Bell, Institute of Group, Italy; Zuzana Mitrova, Cochrane Collaborative Drugs and
Neurology, University College London, UK; Donna Bergen, Rush Alcohol Review Group, Italy; James Mugisha, National Financial support
University Medical Centre, Illinois, USA; José Bertolote, Botucatu Association for Suicide Prevention, Uganda; Adesola Ogunniy,
Medical School, Brazil; Irene Bighelli, Verona University, Italy; University College Hospital, Nigeria; Denis Padruchny,
The following organizations contributed financially to the
Stephanie Burrows, Centre hospitalier de l’université de Montréal, Information and Training Centre of Psychiatry and Narcology,
development and production of the Intervention Guide:
Canada; Erico Castro-Costa, FIOCRUZ (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation), Belarus; Amrita Parekh, Public Health Foundation of India; Khara
Brazil; Tony Charman, Institute of Psychiatry Psychology and Sauro, University of Calgary, Canada; Shoba Raja, Basic Needs, Autism Speaks, USA; CBM; Fountain House Inc.; Government
Neuroscience King’s College, UK; Marek Chawarski, Yale School India; Brian Reichow, Child Study Centre, Yale School of of Japan; Government of the Republic of Korea; Government of
of Medicine, USA; Vera da Ros, Rede Brasileira de Redução de Medicine, USA; Maria Luisa Scattoni, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Switzerland; National Institute of Mental Health, USA; Syngenta.
Danos e Direitos Humanos, Brazil; Carlos Felipe D´Oliveira, Italy; Suvasini Sharma, Lady Hardinge Medical College and
National Association for Suicide Prevention, Brazil; Kieren Egan, associated Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, India; Pratibha
WHO Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, HUG, Switzerland; Singhi, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Eric Emerson, Centre for Disability Research and Policy, University Research, India; Lorenzo Tarsitani, Policlinico Umberto Sapienza
of Sydney, Australia; Saeed Farooq, Department of Psychiatry, University of Rome, Italy; Wietse Tol, Peter Alderman Foundation,
Lady Reading Hospital, Pakistan; Melissa Gladstone, University of Uganda; Sarah Skeen, Stellenbosch University, South Africa;
Liverpool, UK; Charlotte Hanlon, Addis Ababa University, Manjari Tripathi, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, India;
Ethiopia; Angelina Kakooza, Makerere University, Uganda; Ambros Uchtenhagen, University of Zurich, Switzerland; Chris
Rajesh Kalaria, University of Newcastle, UK; Eirini Karyotaki, Vrije Underhill, Basic Needs, UK; Anna Williams, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience King’s College, UK.

INTRODUCTION
1

2
INTRODUCTION
Mental Health Gap Action level; as a capacity building tool for a wide range of health questionnaire and locally facilitated focus group discussions were
professionals and para-professionals; and as a reference guide coordinated by WHO. Reviewer responses collected throughout
Programme (mhGAP) – Background
for developing and updating undergraduate and post-graduate this process have been incorporated into the mhGAP-IG 2.0.
curricula for health professionals.
According to WHO Mental Health Atlas 2014, more than 45% of
Furthermore, several users of mhGAP-IG have highlighted the
the world population lives in a country where there is less than 1
limitations of only having a paper-based format, suggesting that
psychiatrist for every 100,000 people and there are even fewer Development of mhGAP-Intervention
interactive electronic or internet-based (e-) or mobile (m-) versions
neurologists. It is clear that relying solely on specialists to provide
Guide – Version 2.0 of mhGAP-IG might have benefits in terms of increased ease of
services for people affected by mental, neurological and substance
use (MNS) disorders would prevent millions of people from acces- use, added functionality and cost savings. mhGAP-IG 2.0 has there-
sing the services they need. Even when available, the interventions The updated mhGAP guidelines and the feedback and evaluation fore, been designed and packaged with the intention to work across
often are not evidence-based or of high quality. The Mental from mhGAP-IG 1.0 users have shaped the revision and develop- these multiple domains: paper, electronic, and mobile, with the
Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) was thus developed ment of this updated version of mhGAP-IG. A complete update e-mhGAP-IG currently under development and to be released soon.
with the objective of scaling up care for MNS disorders.
of the mhGAP guidelines following the WHO’s process of
guideline development methodology, including the process of Incorporating this extensive feedback, the updated 2015 mhGAP
The mhGAP approach consists of interventions for prevention
evidence review, synthesis and development of recommendations guidelines and the new opportunities afforded by an e-version,
and management of priority MNS conditions, identified on
through the participation of an international panel of individual the key updates of mhGAP-IG 2.0 include:
the basis of evidence about the effectiveness and feasibility of
experts and institutions with appropriate background experi-
scaling up these interventions in low- and middle-income Content update in various sections based on new evidence,
countries. Priority conditions were identified based on the ence: clinicians, researchers, programme managers, policy
feedback and recommendations from mhGAP users.
criteria that they represented a high burden (in terms of makers and service users, was performed and published in 2015.
mortality, morbidity and disability), resulted in large economic The detailed methods and updated recommendations can be Use of a vertical algorithm model, allowing for a streamlined
costs or were associated with violations of human rights. found in the mhGAP Evidence Resource Centre. http://www. and simplified clinical assessment.
These priority conditions include depression, psychoses, who.int/mental_health/mhgap/evidence/en/.
self-harm/suicide, epilepsy, dementia, disorders due to sub- Inclusion of new algorithm for follow-up in all modules.
stance use and mental and behavioural disorders in children and
Feedback has been received from experts in all WHO regions who Inclusion of two new modules: Essential care and practice
adolescents. The mhGAP-Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) is a
used the mhGAP-IG package in the past three years to train non- (which is an update for the chapter on General Principles of
resource to facilitate delivery of the mhGAP evidence-based
specialized health care professionals and to provide MNS services Care in version 1.0) and Implementation module.
guidelines in non-specialized health care settings.
at several implementation sites. A preliminary draft of mhGAP-IG
A revised module for Psychoses (integrating both psychosis
2.0, based on expert and field inputs, was then circulated among a
Uptake of mhGAP-IG Version 1.0 by WHO Member States and
and bipolar disorder), Child and Adolescent Mental and
wide group of reviewers across the world, allowing for a diversity
other stakeholders has been remarkable and clearly shows the
Behavioural Disorders (covering Developmental, Behavioral
need for such a tool. mhGAP-IG Version 1.0 has been used at of opinion in this intensive review process. This process incorpo-
and Emotional Disorders), and Disorders due to Substance
the country level through the following varied methods: most rated feedback from a range of end-users, including non-specialist
Use (including both disorders due to alcohol and disorders
commonly, as a key tool in the phased approach to scale-up health care providers and people with MNS disorders across all
due to drug use).
mental health services on a regional, national, and sub-national WHO regions. End-user feedback was collected through a

Use of mhGAP-IG Version 2.0 How to use the mhGAP-IG Version 2.0
The mhGAP-IG is a model guide and it is essential that it is adapted The mhGAP-IG is a model guide and it is essential that it is The Assessment section is presented in a framework of
to the unique national or local situation. Users may select a subset adapted to the unique national or local situation. Users may flowcharts with multiple clinical assessment points. Each
of the priority conditions or interventions to adapt and implement, select a subset of the priority conditions or interventions to module starts with common presentations of the suspected
depending on the contextual differences in prevalence and adapt and implement, depending on the context. condition, from which there are a series of clinical assess-
availability of resources. Adaptation is necessary to ensure that the
ment questions one should move down answering yes or no,
conditions that contribute most to disease burden in a specific
The mhGAP-IG 2.0 begins with “Essential Care and Practice”, which directs the user to move on for further instructions to
country are covered, and that mhGAP-IG 2.0 is appropriate for
a set of good clinical practices and general guidelines for reach a final clinical assessment. It is important that users of
the local conditions that affect treatment of people with MNS
interactions of health care providers with people seeking the mhGAP-IG start at the top of the assessment and move
disorders in the health care facility. The adaptation process should
mental health care. All users of the mhGAP-IG should through all the decision points to develop a comprehensive
be used as an opportunity to develop a consensus on technical
issues across disease conditions—this requires involvement of key familiarize themselves with these principles and should clinical assessment and management plan.
national stakeholders. Adaptation will include language translation follow them as far as possible.
and ensuring that the interventions are acceptable in their The Management section consists of intervention details
The mhGAP-IG includes a “Master Chart”, which provides
sociocultural context and suitable for the local health system. which provide information on how to manage the specific
information on common presentations of the priority
conditions that have been assessed. This includes more
conditions. This guides the clinician to the relevant modules.
The target user group of mhGAP-IG is non-specialized health- technical psychosocial and pharmacological interventions
care providers working at first- and second-level health-care The most serious conditions should be managed first. when appropriate.
facilities. These providers include primary care doctors, nurses mhGAP-IG 2.0 has a new addition to the Master Chart –
and other members of the health-care workforce. Although Emergency Presentations of Priority MNS Conditions.
The Follow-up section provides detailed information on
mhGAP-IG 2.0 is to be implemented primarily by non-specialists, This section has been added to help identify emergency
how to continue the clinical relationship and detailed
mental health care specialists may also find it useful in their situations and direction to management guidelines.
instructions for follow-up management.
work. In addition, specialists have an essential and substantial
role in training, support and supervision, and mhGAP-IG 2.0 The modules, organized by individual priority conditions, are
indicates where access to specialists is required for consultation a tool for clinical decision-making and management. Each The mhGAP-IG 2.0 uses a series of symbols to highlight
or referral to improve utilization of scarce resources. Specialists module is in a different colour to allow easy differentiation. certain aspects within the modules. A list of the symbols
would also benefit from training on public health aspects of There is an introduction at the beginning of each module and their explanation is given on the following page.
the programme and service organization. Implementation of that explains which condition(s) the module covers and a Throughout the modules, important points are also
mhGAP-IG ideally requires coordinated action by public health quick overview describing key assessment and management highlighted as key clinical tips.
experts and managers, and dedicated specialists with a back-
steps.
ground in public health. Therefore, training in the use of
Also included is a module on Implementation of mhGAP-IG,
mhGAP-IG is best done as part of a systems approach involving Each of the modules consists of three sections: which provides summary steps on how to implement
health planners, managers and policy makers so that the mhGAP-IG.
Assessment
interventions proposed are supported by necessary infrastructure/
At the end of the guide, a glossary of terms used in
resources e.g. availability of essential medicines. mhGAP-IG
Management
mhGAP-IG 2.0 is provided.
training also needs to be incorporated in an ongoing manner
with mechanisms in place to ensure adequate support, supervi- Follow-up
sion and refresher training for the healthcare providers.
3

4
INTRODUCTION
Visual Elements & Symbols
Sequence of assessment steps Children / adolescents
Assessment
1
Women who are of child-bearing
age, pregnant or breastfeeding
Management
Adult
Older adult
Follow-up
CAUTION
Stop and exit module
Refer to hospital Do not
Go to PROTOCOL 1
Medication Further information
Return to algorithm
after following instructions Move to another section
Psychosocial intervention
within module
Consult specialist
CLINICAL TIP

ESSENTIAL CARE & PRACTICE
This module outlines the principles of essential care for all people A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
seeking health care, including those with MNS conditions, and
– Use effective communication skills
their carers. The first section of this module covers the general prin-
– Promote respect and dignity
ciples of clinical care and aims to promote respect for the privacy
of people seeking care for MNS conditions, foster good relation-
B. E SSENTIALS OF MENTAL HEALTH
ships between health care providers, service users and their carers,
CLINICAL PRACTICE
and ensure care is provided in a non-judgmental, non-stigmatizing,
and supportive manner. The second section covers essentials of – Assess physical health
mental health clinical practice and aims to present healthcare – Conduct a MNS assessment
providers with an overview of the assessment and management
– Manage MNS conditions
of MNS conditions in non-specialized settings.
ESSENTIAL CARE AND PRACTICE 5

6
EECCPP
ESSENTIAL CARE & PRACTICE
A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
I. Use Effective Communication Skills
Using effective communication skills allows healthcare COMMUNICATION TIP #2 COMMUNICATION TIP #5
providers to deliver good quality care to adults, adolescents, Involve the person Use good verbal communication skills
and children with mental, neurological and substance use (MNS)
conditions. Consider the following core communication skills
Include the person (and with their consent, their carers Use simple language. Be clear and concise.
and tips:
and family) in all aspects of assessment and management
Use open-ended questions, summarizing and clarifying
as much as possible. This includes children, adolescents
statements.
COMMUNICATION TIP #1 and older adults.
Summarize and repeat key points.
Create an environment that
Allow the person to ask questions about the information
facilitates open communication COMMUNICATION TIP #3
provided.
Start by listening
Meet the person in a private space, if possible.
Be welcoming and conduct introductions in a culturally Actively listen. Be empathic and sensitive. COMMUNICATION TIP #6
appropriate manner. Allow the person to speak without interruption. Respond with sensitivity when people
Maintain eye contact and use body language and facial If the history is unclear, be patient and ask for clarification. disclose difficult experiences (e.g.
expressions that facilitate trust.
For children, use language that they can understand. For sexual assault, violence or self-harm)
Explain that information discussed during the visit will example, ask about their interests (toys, friends, school, etc.).
be kept confidential and will not be shared without prior
For adolescents, convey that you understand their feelings Show extra sensitivity with difficult topics.
permission.
and situation.
If carers are present, suggest to speak with the person Remind the person that what they tell you will remain
alone (except for young children) and obtain consent to confidential.
COMMUNICATION TIP #4
share clinical information.
Acknowledge that it may have been difficult for the
Be friendly, respectful and non-
When interviewing a young woman, consider having person to disclose the information.
another female staff member or carer present. judgemental at all times
Always be respectful.
Don’t judge people by their behaviours and appearance.
Stay calm and patient.

II. Promote Respect and Dignity
Persons with MNS conditions should be treated with respect
and dignity in a culturally appropriate manner. As a health care DOs DON'Ts
provider, make every effort to respect and promote the will
and preference of people with MNS conditions and support
Treat people with MNS conditions with respect and Do not discriminate against people with MNS
and engage them and their carers in the most inclusive way.
dignity. conditions.
Persons with MNS conditions are often more vulnerable to
human rights violations. Therefore, it is essential that in the Protect the confidentiality of people with MNS Do not ignore the priorities or wishes of people with
health care setting, providers promote the rights of people with conditions. MNS conditions.
MNS conditions in line with international human rights
Ensure privacy in the clinical setting. Do not make decisions for, on behalf of, or instead of
standards, including the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
the person with MNS conditions.
with Disability (CRPD)*. Always provide access to information and explain the
proposed treatment risks and benefits in writing, if Do not use overly technical language in explaining
*For more information on CRPD: https://www.un.org/
possible. proposed treatment.
development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-
persons-with-disabilities.html Make sure the person provides consent to treatment.
Promote autonomy and independent living in the
community.
Provide persons with MNS conditions with access to
supported decision making options.
ESSENTIAL CARE AND PRACTICE 7

8
ECP
EESSSSEENNTTIIAALL CCAARREE A& NPDR APCRTAICCETICE
B. ESSENTIALS OF MENTAL HEALTH CLINICAL PRACTICE
I. Assess Physical Health
Assessment of Physical Health Management of Physical Health
Persons with MNS disorders are at higher risk of premature
mortality from preventable disease and therefore must always
receive a physical health assessment as part of a comprehensive Take a detailed history and ask about risk factors. Treat existing comorbidities concurrently with the MNS
evaluation. Be sure to take a proper history, including both Physical inactivity, inappropriate diet, tobacco, disorder. Refer to/consult with specialists, if needed.
physical health and MNS history, followed by a physical health harmful alcohol and/or substance use, risky behaviour
Provide education on modifiable risk factors to prevent
assessment to identify concurrent conditions and educate the and chronic disease.
disease and encourage a healthy lifestyle.
person about preventive measures. These actions must always
Perform a physical examination.
To support physical health of persons with MNS conditions,
be undertaken with the person’s informed consent.
Consider a differential diagnosis. health care providers should:
Rule out physical conditions and underlying causes of MNS
– Provide advice about the importance of physical activity
presentations by history, physical examination and basic
and a healthy diet.
laboratory tests as needed and available.
– Educate people about harmful alcohol use.
Identify comorbidities.
– Encourage cessation of tobacco and substance use.
Often, a person may have more than one MNS condition at
the same time. It is important to assess and manage this – Provide education about other risky behaviour (e.g.
when it occurs. unprotected sex).
– Conduct regular physical health checks and vaccinations.
– Prepare people for developmental life changes, such as
puberty and menopause, and provide the necessary
CLINICAL TIP:
support.
Persons with severe mental disorders are 2 to 3 times
– Discuss plans for pregnancy and contraception methods
more likely to die of preventable disease like infections
with women of childbearing age.
and cardiovascular disorders. Focus on reducing risk
through education and monitoring.

II. Conduct a MNS Assessment
Conducting an assessment for MNS conditions involves the following steps. First, the presenting complaint is explored, then a history is obtained including
asking about past MNS issues, general health problems, family MNS history, and psychosocial history. Observe the person (Mental Status Exam), establish
a differential diagnosis, and identify the MNS condition. As part of the assessment, conduct a physical examination and obtain basic laboratory tests as
needed. The assessment is conducted with informed consent of the person.
HISTORY TAKING
1 Presenting Complaint 4 Family History of MNS Conditions
Main symptom or reason that the person is seeking care. E xplore possible family history of MNS conditions and ask if anyone
Ask when, why, and how it started. had similar symptoms or has received treatment for a MNS condition.
It is important at this stage to gather as much information as
possible about the person’s symptoms and their situation. 5 Psychosocial History
A sk about current stressors, coping methods and social support.
2 Past MNS History A sk about current socio-occupational functioning (how the person is
functioning at home, work and in relationships).
Ask about similar problems in the past, any psychiatric hospitalizations or
medications prescribed for MNS conditions, and any past suicide attempts.
O btain basic information including where the person lives, level of
education, work/employment history, marital status and number/ages
Explore tobacco, alcohol and substance use.
of children, income, and household structure/living conditions.
3 General Health History
For children and adolescents, ask about whether they have a carer,
Ask about physical health problems and medications.
and the nature and quality of the relationship between them.
Obtain a list of current medications.
Ask about allergies to medications.
ESSENTIAL CARE AND PRACTICE 9

10
ECP
EESSSSEENNTTIIAALL CCAARREE A& NPDR APCRTAICCETICE
Suspect a priority MNS condition
and go to the relevant module(s) for
assessment
ASSESSMENT FOR MNS CONDITIONS
1 Physical Examination 4 Basic Laboratory Tests
C onduct a targeted physical examination guided by the information R equest laboratory tests when indicated and possible, especially
found during the MNS assessment. to rule out physical causes.
5 Identify the MNS Condition
2 Mental Status Examination (MSE)*
A sk about and observe the person’s Appearance and Behaviour,
I dentify the MNS condition using the appropriate module(s).
Mood and Affect, Content of Thought, any Perceptual disturbances and
A ssess for other MNS symptoms and priority conditions
(see Master Chart).
Cognition. See symptom based Master Chart (MC) for details.
F ollow the appropriate management algorithm and treatment
protocols.
3 Differential Diagnosis
C onsider the differential diagnosis and rule out conditions that have
similar presenting symptoms.
CLINICAL TIP:
Once a MNS disorder is suspected,
always assess for self harm/suicide ( SUI )
* Mental Status Examination adapted for non-specialists may include: Behavior and Appearance = symptoms and signs involving the way a person looks or acts; Mood and Affect = symptoms and signs involving
the regulation and expression of emotions or feeling states; Content of Thought = symptoms and signs involving subject matter of thoughts including delusions, paranoia, suspiciousness and suicidal ideation;
Perceptual Disturbance = sensory perceptions occurring in the absence of the appropriate (external) stimulus (e.g. auditory or visual hallucinations). The person may or may not have insight into the unreal nature of the
perception; Cognition = symptoms, signs and clinical findings indicative of a disturbance in mental abilities and processes related to attention, memory, judgment, reasoning, problem solving, decision making,
comprehension and the integration of these functions.

III. Manage MNS Conditions
Once the assessment is conducted, follow the management algorithm in mhGAP-IG to manage the MNS disorder.
Key steps in management are found in the box below.
MANAGEMENT STEPS FOR MNS CONDITIONS
Many MNS conditions are chronic and require long-term monitoring and follow-up.
Managing a MNS disorder over time involves the following steps.
1 Develop a treatment plan in collaboration with 4 Refer to specialists or hospital when indicated
the person and their carer. and available.
5 Ensure that appropriate plan for follow-up is in place.
CLINICAL TIP:
Written treatment plan should cover:
6 Work together with carer and families
– Pharmacological interventions (if any)
– Psychosocial interventions in supporting the person with the MNS disorder.
– Referrals
– Follow-up plan
7 Foster strong links with employment, education,
– Management of any concurrent physical and/or other MNS conditions
social services (including housing) and other relevant sectors.
2 Always offer psychosocial interventions for the person 8 Modify treatment plans for special populations.
and their carers.
3 Treat the MNS disorder using pharmacological
interventions when indicated.
ESSENTIAL CARE AND PRACTICE 11

12
ECP
EESSSSEENNTTIIAALL CCAARREE A& NPDR APCRTAICCETICE
1. Treatment Planning B. Reduce stress and strengthen social D. Psychological Treatment
1
supports
Discuss and determine treatment goals that respect the Psychological treatments are interventions that typically
willingness and preferences for care. Address current psychosocial stressors: require substantial dedicated time and tend to be provided
Identify and discuss relevant psychosocial issues that place by specialists trained in providing them. Nonetheless, they
Involve the carer after obtaining the person’s agreement.
stress on the person and/or impact their life including, but can be effectively delivered by trained and supervised
Encourage self-monitoring of symptoms and explain when not limited to, family and relationship problems, employ- non-specialized workers and through guided self-help (e.g.
to seek care urgently. ment/occupation/livelihood issues, housing, finances, access with use of e-mental health programmes or self-help books).
to basic security and services, stigma, discrimination, etc.
The interventions listed below are described briefly in
Assist the person to manage stress by discussing methods such
the glossary.
22. Psychosocial Interventions as problem solving techniques.
Assess and manage any situation of maltreatment, abuse (e.g.
A. Psychoeducation domestic violence) and neglect (e.g. of children or the elderly).
Example of Intervention Recommended for:
Discuss with the person possible referrals to a trusted protec-
Provide information about the MNS condition to the tion agency or informal protection network. Contact legal and Behavioral Activation DEP
person, including: community resources, as appropriate. Relaxation Training DEP
What the condition is and its expected course and Identify supportive family members and involve them as Problem Solving Treatment DEP
outcome. much as possible and appropriate. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) DEP, CMH, SUB, PSY
Contingency Management Therapy SUB
Available treatments for the condition and their Strengthen social supports and try to reactivate the
Family Counseling or Therapy PSY, SUB
expected benefits. person’s social networks.
Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) DEP
Duration of treatment. Identify prior social activities that, if reinitiated, would
Motivational Enhancement Therapy SUB
Importance of adhering to treatment, including what have the potential for providing direct or indirect psycho- Parent Skills Training CMH
the person can do (e.g. taking medication or practising social support (e.g. family gatherings, visiting neighbours,
relevant psychological interventions such as relaxation community activities, religious activities, etc.).
exercises) and what carers can do to help the person Teach stress management such as relaxation techniques.
adhere to treatment.
Potential side-effects (short and long term) of any C. P romote functioning in
prescribed medication that the person (and their carers)
daily activities
need to monitor.
Potential involvement of social workers, case managers,
Provide the person support to continue regular social,
community health workers or other trusted members in the
educational and occupational activities as much as possible.
community.
Facilitate inclusion in economic activities.
Refer to management section of relevant module(s) for specific
Offer life skills training, and/or social skills training if needed.
information on the MNS disorder.

33. Pharmacological Interventions 55. Follow-up
Follow the guidelines on psychopharmacology in each A rrange a follow-up visit after the initial assessment. – Have a plan of action for when the person does not
module. show up for appointments.
After every visit, schedule a follow-up appointment and
Use pharmacological interventions when available and
encourage attendance. Schedule the appointment at a
– Use family and community resources to contact people
when indicated in the management algorithm and table who have not returned for regular follow-up.
mutually convenient time.
provided. – Consult a specialist if the person does not improve or
Schedule initial follow-up visits more frequently
worsens.
In selecting the appropriate essential medication,
until the symptoms begin to respond to treatment.
consider the side effect profile of the medication (short – Document key aspects of interactions with the person
Once symptoms start improving, schedule less frequent
and long term), efficacy of past treatment, drug-drug and the family in the case notes.
but regular appointments.
interactions or drug-disease interactions.
Refer to the management section of relevant
Consult the National Formulary or the WHO Formulary as
At each follow-up meeting, assess for:
module(s) for disorder-specific follow-up information.
needed.
– Response to treatment, medication side-effects, and ad-
Educate the person about risks and benefits of treatment, herence to medications and psychosocial interventions.
potential side effects, duration of treatment, and impor- – General health status (be sure to monitor physical health
tance of adherence. status regularly).
Exercise caution when providing medication to special – Self-care (e.g. diet, hygiene, clothing) and functioning in
groups such as older people, those with chronic disease, the person’s own environment.
women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, and children/
– Psychosocial issues and/or change in living conditions
adolescents. Consult a specialist as needed.
that can affect management.
– The person’s and the carer’s understanding and expec-
tations of the treatment. Correct any misconceptions.
44. Referral to specialist/hospital
During the entire follow-up period:
if needed
– Acknowledge all progress towards the treatment goals
and reinforce adherence.
Stay alert for situations that may require referral to a
– Maintain regular contact with the person (and their carer,
specialist/hospital, for example, non-response to treatment,
when appropriate). If available, assign a community worker
serious side effects with pharmacological interventions,
or another trusted person in the community to support
comorbid physical and/or MNS conditions, risk of self-harm/
the person (such as a family member).
suicide.
– Explain that the person can return to the clinic at any
time in between follow-up visits if needed (e.g. for side-
effects of medications, etc).
ESSENTIAL CARE AND PRACTICE 13

14
ECP
EESSSSEENNTTIIAALL CCAARREE A& NPDR APCRTAICCETICE
66. Involving Carers 8 8 . Special Populations
When appropriate, and with the consent of the person CHILDREN / ADOLESCENTS O LDER ADULTS
concerned, involve the carer or family member in the
Explore exposure to adverse factors such as Address psychosocial stressors that are particularly
person’s care.
violence and neglect which may affect mental health relevant to the person, respecting their need for
Acknowledge that it can be challenging to care for people and wellbeing. autonomy.
with MNS conditions.
Assess the needs of carers. Identify and treat concurrent physical health problems
Explain to the carer the importance of respecting the and manage sensory deficits (such as low vision or poor
Treat adolescents who may come alone for help even if
dignity and rights of the person with a MNS condition. hearing) with appropriate devices (e.g. magnifying glass,
not accompanied by parent or guardian. Obtain informed
hearing aids).
Identify psychosocial impact on carers. consent from the adolescent.
Use lower doses of medications.
Assess the carer’s needs to ensure necessary support Allow opportunities for the child/adolescent to express
and resources for family life, employment, social activities, concerns in private. Anticipate increased risk of drug interactions.
and health.
Adapt language to the child/adolescent’s level of Address needs of carers.
Encourage involvement in self-help and family support understanding.
groups, where available.
Explore available resources within the family, school
With the consent of the person, keep carers informed and community.
about the person’s health status, including issues related
to assessment, treatment, follow-up, and any potential
W OMEN WHO ARE PREGNANT OR
side-effects.
BREAST-FEEDING
If the woman is of child-bearing age, ask about:
7. Links with other sectors
7
– Breastfeeding
– Possible pregnancy
– Last menstrual period, if pregnant
To ensure comprehensive care and based on the initial
assessment, link the person to employment, education, social
Liaise with maternal health specialist to organize care.
services (including housing) and other relevant sectors.
Consider consultation with mental health specialist if
available.
Exercise caution with pharmacological interventions –
check toxicity to fetus and passage into breast milk.
Consult a specialist as needed.

MASTER CHART
MASTER CHART 15

16
Overview of
Priority MNS Conditions
1. These common presentations indicate the need for assessment.
2. If people present with features of more than one condition, then all relevant conditions
need to be assessed.
3. All conditions apply to all ages, unless otherwise specified.
4. For emergency presentations, please see the table on page 18.
COMMON PRESENTATION PRIORITY CONDITION
Multiple persistent physical symptoms with no clear cause
Low energy, fatigue, sleep problems DEPRESSION (DEP)
Persistent sadness or depressed mood, anxiety
Loss of interest or pleasure in activities that are normally pleasurable
Marked behavioural changes; neglecting usual responsibilities related to work,
school, domestic or social activities
Agitated, aggressive behavior, decreased or increased activity PSYCHOSES (PSY)
Fixed false beliefs not shared by others in the person’s culture
Hearing voices or seeing things that are not there
Lack of realization that one is having mental health problems
Convulsive movement or fits/seizures
During the convulsion: loss of consciousness or impaired consciousness, stiffness,
EPILEPSY (EPI)
rigidity, tongue bite, injury, incontinence of urine or faeces
After the convulsion: fatigue, drowsiness, sleepiness, confusion, abnormal behaviour,
headache, muscle aches, or weakness on one side of the body

Child/adolescent being seen for physical complaints or Behaviour (e.g. too active, aggressive, having frequent
a general health assessment who has: and/or severe tantrums, wanting to be alone too much,
refusing to do regular activities or go to school)
Problem with development, emotions or behaviour CHILD & ADOLESCENT
(e.g. inattention, over-activity, or repeated defiant, Teacher with concerns about a child/adolescent
disobedient and aggressive behaviour) MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL
e.g. easily distracted, disruptive in class, often getting
Risk factors such as malnutrition, abuse and/or neglect, frequent into trouble, difficulty completing school work
DISORDERS (CMH)
illness, chronic diseases (e.g. HIV/AIDS or history of difficult birth)
Community health or social services worker with
Carer with concerns about the child/adolescent’s: concerns about a child/adolescent
Common presentations of emotional, behavioral
Difficulty keeping up with peers or carrying out daily e.g. rule- or law-breaking behaviour, physical aggression and developmental disorders vary by age in
activities considered normal for age at home or in the community children and adolescents.
Decline or problems with memory (severe forgetfulness) and orientation (awareness of time, place and person)
DEMENTIA (DEM)
Mood or behavioural problems such as apathy (appearing uninterested) or irritability
Loss of emotional control (easily upset, irritable or tearful)
Difficulties in carrying out usual work, domestic or social activities
Appearing affected by alcohol or other substance Incidental findings: macrocytic anaemia, low
(e.g. smell of alcohol, slurred speech, sedated, erratic platelet count, elevated mean corpuscular
behaviour) volume (MCV) DISORDERS DUE
Signs and symptoms of acute behavioural effects, Emergency presentation due to substance
TO SUBSTANCE
withdrawal features or effects of prolonged use withdrawal, overdose, or intoxication.
Person may appear sedated, overstimulated,
Deterioration of social functioning (i.e. difficulties at USE (SUB)
agitated, anxious or confused
work or home, unkempt appearance)
Persons with disorders due to substance use
Signs of chronic liver disease (abnormal liver enzymes), All persons presenting to
may not report any problems with substance
jaundiced (yellow) skin and eyes, palpable and tender health care facilities should
use. Look for:
liver edge (in early liver disease), ascites (distended be asked about
abdomen is filled with fluid), spider naevi (spider-like – Recurrent requests for psychoactive their tobacco and
blood vessels visible on the surface of the skin), and medications including analgesics alcohol use.
altered mental status (hepatic encephalopathy) – Injuries
– Infections associated with intravenous drug
Problems with balance, walking, coordinated
use (HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis C)
movements, and nystagmus
Extreme hopelessness and despair
Current thoughts, plan or act of self-harm/ SELF-HARM/SUICIDE (SUI)
suicide, or history thereof
Any of the other priority conditions, chronic
pain, or extreme emotional distress
17

18
EMERGENCY Presentations of Priority MNS Conditions
EMERGENCY PRESENTATION CONDITION TO CONSIDER GO TO
Act of self-harm with signs of poisoning or intoxication,
bleeding from self-inflicted wound, loss of consciousness MEDICALLY SERIOUS ACT OF SELF-HARM
and/or extreme lethargy
SUI
Current thoughts, plan, or act of self-harm or suicide, or
IMMINENT RISK OF SELF-HARM/SUICIDE
history of thoughts, plan, or act of self-harm or suicide in a
person who is now extremely agitated, violent, distressed
or lacks communication
Acute convulsion with loss of consciousness or impaired
EPILEPSY
consciousness
EPI, SUB
STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Continuous convulsions
ALCOHOL OR OTHER SEDATIVE WITHDRAWAL
Agitated and/or aggressive behaviour DEM, PSY, SUB
Smell of alcohol on the breath, slurred speech, uninhibited
behaviour; disturbance in the level of consciousness, cognition, ACUTE ALCOHOL INTOXICATION
perception, affect or behaviour
Tremor in hands, sweating, vomiting, increased pulse and ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL
SUB
blood pressure, agitation, headache, nausea, anxiety; seizure ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL DELIRIUM
and confusion in severe cases
Unresponsive or minimally responsive, slow respiratory rate,
SEDATIVE OVERDOSE OR INTOXICATION
pinpoint pupils
Dilated pupils, excited, racing thoughts, disordered thinking,
ACUTE STIMULANT INTOXICATION OR OVERDOSE
strange behaviour, recent use of cocaine or other stimulants,
increased pulse and blood pressure, aggressive, erratic or
violent behaviour

DEPRESSION
People with depression experience a range of symptoms Depression commonly occurs alongside other MNS conditions as
including persistent depressed mood or loss of interest and well as physical conditions.
pleasure for at least 2 weeks.
The management of symptoms not fully meeting the criteria
People with depression as described in this module have for depression is covered within the module on Other Significant
considerable difficulty with daily functioning in personal, family, Mental Health Complaints. Go to » OTH.
social, educational, occupational or other areas.
Many people with depression also suffer from anxiety symptoms
and medically unexplained somatic symptoms.
19

20
DEP
DEPRESSION
DEP Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
D oes the person have depression? Management Protocols
1. Depression
Are there other explanations for the symptoms? 2. Depressive episode in bipolar disorder
3. Special populations
– Rule out physical conditions
– Rule out a history of mania
– Rule out normal reactions to recent major loss
Psychosocial Interventions
Assess for other priority MNS conditions
Pharmacological Interventions
FOLLOW-UP

DEPRESSION Assessment
DEP 1 Assessment
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF DEPRESSION
M ultiple persistent physical symptoms with no clear cause
L ow energy, fatigue, sleep problems
P ersistent sadness or depressed mood, anxiety
L oss of interest or pleasure in activities that are normally pleasurable
11
Does the person have depression?
Has the person had at least one of the following
core symptoms of depression for at least 2 weeks?
– Persistent depressed mood
– Markedly diminished interest in or pleasure from activities
Depression is unlikely
Go to OTH
DEPRESSION 21

22
DEP 1
DEPRESSION Assessment
Has the person had several of the following additional symptoms
for at least 2 weeks:
– Disturbed sleep or sleeping too much – Indecisiveness
– Significant change in appetite or weight – Observable agitation or physical
(decrease or increase) restlessness
– Beliefs of worthlessness or excessive guilt – Talking or moving more slowly than usual
– Fatigue or loss of energy – Hopelessness
– Reduced concentration – Suicidal thoughts or acts
Depression is unlikely
Go to OTH
Does the person have considerable difficulty with
daily functioning in personal, family, social, educational,
occupational or other areas?
Depression is unlikely
Go to OTH CLINICAL TIP:
A person with depression may have psychotic
symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations. If
present, treatment for depression needs to be
Consider DEPRESSION
adapted. CONSULT A SPECIALIST.

2
Are there other possible explanations
for the symptoms?
IS THIS A PHYSICAL CONDITION THAT CAN RESEMBLE OR EXACERBATE DEPRESSION?
Are there signs and symptoms suggesting anaemia, malnutrition,
hypothyroidism, mood changes from substance use and medication side-effects
(e.g. mood changes from steroids)?
MANAGE THE
PHYSICAL CONDITION
Do depressive symptoms remain
after treatment?
No treatment
needed.
DEPRESSION 23

24
DEP 1
DEPRESSION Assessment
IS THERE A HISTORY OF MANIA?
Have several of the following symptoms occurred simultaneously, lasting for at least 1 week, and severely
enough to interfere significantly with work and social activities or requiring hospitalization or confinement?
– Elevation of mood and/or irritability – Loss of normal social inhibitions resulting in inappropriate
– Decreased need for sleep behaviours
– Increased activity, feeling of increased energy, increased – Being easily distracted
talkativeness or rapid speech – Unrealistically inflated self-esteem
– Impulsive or reckless behaviours such as excessive spending, making
important decisions without planning and sexual indiscretion
CLINICAL TIP:
DEPRESSIVE EPISODE
People with depressive episode in
IN BIPOLAR bipolar disorder are at risk for mania.
Treatment is different from depres-
DISORDER is likely
sion. Protocol 2 must be applied.
Go to STEP 1 30 then to PROTOCOL 2
HAS THERE BEEN A MAJOR LOSS (E.G. BEREAVEMENT)
WITHIN THE LAST 6 MONTHS?
DEPRESSION is likely
G o to STEP 1 30 then to PROTOCOL 1

Are any of the following symptoms present?
– Suicidal ideation – Talking or moving more
– Beliefs of worthlessness slowly than normal
– Psychotic symptoms
Does the person have a previous
history of depression?
DEPRESSION is likely
Do not manage for depression.
Go to OTH
3
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK
Are there concurrent priority MNS conditions? OF SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
»
before continuing. Go to SUI.
A ssess for concurrent MNS conditions according to the
mhGAP-IG master chart. Go to
»
MC.
People with depression are at higher risk for most other priority MNS conditions.
Assess for disorders due to substance use.
Go to PROTOCOL 1
DEPRESSION 25

26
DEP 2
DEPRESSION Management
DEP 2 Management
Special populations
Note that interventions may differ
for these populations
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
1 2
Depression Depression in Bipolar Disorder CHILD / ADOLESCENT
For management of depression in
» » children/adolescents, go to CMH.
Provide psychoeducation to the person and their Consult a specialist.
carers. (2.1) »
If a specialist is not immediately available,
»
Reduce stress and strengthen social supports. (2.2) follow treatment for depression (PROTOCOL 1).
» However, NEVER prescribe antidepressants
Promote functioning in daily activities and
alone without a mood stabilizer such as lithium,
community life. (2.3) WOMEN WHO ARE PREGNANT OR
carbamazepine or valproate because anti-
BREASTFEEDING
»
Consider antidepressants. (2.5) depressants can lead to mania in people with
» bipolar disorder (Go to PSY).
If available, consider referral for one of the
»
» F ollow treatment for depression
following brief psychological treatments: If symptoms of mania develop, tell the person
(PROTOCOL 1) but AVOID anti-
interpersonal therapy (IPT), cognitive behavioural and the carers to stop the antidepressant
depressants if possible, especially during
therapy (CBT), behaviour activation and problem- immediately and return for help.
the first trimester.
solving counselling. (2.4)
»
» I f no response to psychological treat-
DO NOT manage the symptoms with ineffective
ment, consider using with caution the
treatments, e.g. vitamin injections.
lowest effective dose of antidepressants.
»
Offer regular follow-up.
»
I f breastfeeding, avoid long acting
medication such as fluoxetine.
»
C ONSULT A SPECIALIST, if available.

PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.1 P sychoeducation: key messages 2.2 R educe stress and strengthen 2.4 B rief psychological treatments
to the person and the carers social support for depression
Depression is a very common condition that can happen Assess for and try to reduce stressors. (Go to » ECP) This guide does not provide specific protocols to implement
to anybody. brief psychological interventions. WHO, among other
Reactivate the person’s previous social network. Identify prior
agencies, has developed manuals that describe their use
The occurrence of depression does not mean that the person social activities that, if started again, may potentially provide for depression. An example is, Problem Management Plus,
direct or indirect psychosocial support, e.g. family gatherings,
is weak or lazy. (http://www.who.int/mental_health/emergencies/ problem_
visiting neighbours, and community activities.
management_plus/en/), which describes the use of
Negative attitudes of others (e.g. “You should be stronger”,
behavioural activation, relaxation training, problem solving
“Pull yourself together”) may be because depression is
treatment and strengthening social supports. Moreover, the
not a visible condition, unlike a fracture or a wound. There
2.3 P romote functioning in daily
manual Group Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) for Depression
is also the misconception that people with depression can activities and community life
describes group treatment of depression (http://www.who.
easily control their symptoms by sheer willpower. int/mental_health/mhgap/interpersonal_therapy/en).
Even if it is difficult, encourage the person to try to do as Thinking Healthy, (http://www.who.int/mental_health/
People with depression tend to have unrealistically negative
many of the following as possible: maternal-child/ thinking_healthy/en), describes the use of
opinions about themselves, their life and their future. Their
cognitive-behavioural therapy for perinatal depression.
current situation may be very difficult, but depression can – Try to start again (or continue) activities that were
cause unjustified thoughts of hopelessness and previously pleasurable.
worthlessness. These views are likely to improve once the
– Try to maintain regular sleeping and waking times.
depression improves.
– Try to be as physically active as possible.
Thoughts of self-harm or suicide are common. If they
– Try to eat regularly despite changes in appetite.
notice these thoughts, they should not act on them, but
should tell a trusted person and come back for help – Try to spend time with trusted friends and family.
immediately.
– Try to participate in community and other social activities
as much as possible.
Explain to the person and carer that these activities can
all help improve mood.
DEPRESSION 27

28
DEP 2
DEPRESSION Management
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
2.5 C onsider antidepressants
Discuss with the person and decide together whether to CAUTION OLDER ADULTS
prescribe antidepressants. Explain that:
If the person develops a manic episode, stop the anti-
Avoid amitriptyline if possible.
– Antidepressants are not addictive. depressant immediately; it may trigger a manic episode
– It is very important to take the medication every day as
in untreated bipolar disorder. PEOPLE WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
prescribed. Do not combine with other antidepressants, as this may Do NOT prescribe amitriptyline.
– Some side effects may be experienced within the first few cause serotonin syndrome.
days but they usually resolve.
Antidepressants may increase suicidal ideation, especially in ADULTS WITH THOUGHTS OR PLANS OF SUICIDE
– It usually takes several weeks before improvements in adolescents and young adults.
SSRIs are the first choice. Overdose of TCAs such as
mood, interest or energy is noticed.
amitriptyline may be fatal and therefore should be avoided in
Consider the person’s age, concurrent medical conditions, Antidepressants in special populations this group.
and drug side-effect profile.
If there is an imminent risk of self-harm or suicide
Start with only one medication at the lowest starting dose.
ADOLESCENTS 12 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER
(Go to
»
SUI), give a limited supply of antidepressants
(e.g. one week supply at a time).
If symptoms persist or worsen despite psychosocial inter-
Antidepressant medications usually need to be continued
ventions, consider fluoxetine (but no other selective serotonin Ask the person’s carers to keep and monitor medications
for at least 9-12 months after the resolution of symptoms..
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)). and to follow-up frequently to prevent medication overdose.
Medications should never be stopped just because the
If fluoxetine is prescribed, ask the adolescent to return weekly,
person experiences some improvement. Educate the person
for the first 4 weeks, to monitor thoughts or plans of suicide.
on the recommended timeframe to take medications.
WOMEN WHO ARE PREGNANT OR BREASTFEEDING
Avoid antidepressants, if possible.
Consider antidepressants at the lowest effective dose if there
is no response to psychosocial interventions.
If the woman is breastfeeding, avoid long acting
antidepressant medication such as fluoxetine.
Consult a specialist if available.

TABLE 1: Antidepressants
MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
AMITRIPTYLINE Start 25 mg at bedtime. Common: Sedation, orthostatic hypotension (risk of fall), Avoid in persons with cardiac disease, history of seizure,
(a tricyclic antidepressant Increase by 25-50 mg per week to 100-150 mg blurred vision, difficulty urinating, nausea, weight gain, hyperthyroidism, urinary retention, or narrow angle-closure glaucoma,
(TCA)) daily (maximum 300 mg). sexual dysfunction. and bipolar disorder (can trigger mania in people with untreated bipolar
Note: Minimum effective dose in adults is 75 mg. disorder).
Sedation may be seen at lower doses. Serious: ECG changes (e.g. QTc prolongation), cardiac
arrhythmia, increased risk of seizure. Overdose can lead to seizures, cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension,
Elderly/Medically Ill: Start 25 mg at bedtime to coma, or death.
50-75 mg daily (maximum 100 mg).
Levels of amitriptyline may be increased by anti-malarials including
Children/Adolescents: Do not use. quinine.
FLUOXETINE Start 10 mg daily for one week then 20 mg daily. Common: Sedation, insomnia, headache, dizziness, Caution in persons with history of seizure.
(a selective serotonin If no response in 6 weeks, increase to 40 mg gastrointestinal disturbances, changes in appetite, and
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)) (maximum 80 mg). sexual dysfunction. Drug-Drug interactions: Avoid combination with warfarin
(may increase bleeding risk). May increase levels of TCAs, antipsychotics,
Elderly/medically ill: preferred choice. Serious: bleeding abnormalities in those who use and beta-blockers.
Start 10 mg daily, then increase to 20 mg aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, low
(maximum 40 mg). sodium levels. Caution in combination with tamoxifen, codeine, and tramadol (reduces
the effect of these drugs).
Adolescents
Start 10 mg daily. Increase to 20 mg daily if no
response in 6 weeks (maximum 40 mg).
DEPRESSION 29

30
DEP 3
DEPRESSION Follow-up
DEP 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
1 »
Schedule the second appointment
within 1 week.
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT »
Initially maintain regular contact
via telephone, home visits, letters,
or contact cards more frequently,
Is the person improving?
e.g. monthly, for the first 3 months.
» If not yet receiving psychological treatment, » Encourage the person to continue with their
consider psychological treatment. current management plan until they are symptom
» free for 9-12 months.
If receiving a psychological treatment, evaluate engagement in
and experience of current psychological treatment. » A rrange a further follow up appointment
» in 1-2 weeks.
If not yet on antidepressants, consider antidepressants.
»
» D ecrease contact as the person’s symptoms improve,
If on antidepressants, assess:
e.g. once every 3 months after the initial 3 months.
– Does the person take the medication as prescribed?
Note: follow up should continue until the person no longer
If not, explore reasons why and encourage adherence.
has any symptoms of depression.
– Are there side effects?
If yes, evaluate and weigh benefits of treatment.
If no to side effects to antidepressants, increase dose (TABLE 1).
Follow-up in 1-2 weeks.
CAUTION WITH DOSE INCREASE. CLOSE FOLLOW-UP NEEDED
DUE TO POSSIBLE INCREASE IN SIDE EFFECTS.

Are there symptoms of mania?
»
Discontinue antidepressant medication.
2
»
T reat mania and consult a specialist.
Go to PSY.
MONITOR TREATMENT
At every contact:
»
Provide psychoeducation, reduce stress and strengthen social supports, promote functioning in daily activities
and community life, and review, if applicable, antidepressant medication use and psychological treatment.
»
Does the person have any new symptoms of concern? Review for MNS and concurrent physical conditions.
»
Is the person a woman of childbearing age and considering pregnancy? If so, CONSULT A SPECIALIST.
Assess for any IMMINENT RISK OF SUICIDE (Go to SUI).
3
REVISE TREATMENT AS APPROPRIATE
Has the person been symptom free for 9-12 months?
»
Discuss with the person the risks and
benefits of stopping the medication
»
» Taper the dose of medication gradually,
Continue medication until person is
over a minimum of 4 weeks. Monitor
symptom free for 9-12 months.
the person for symptom recurrence.
DEPRESSION 31

32
DEPRESSION

PSYCHOSES
The psychoses module covers management of two severe mental Bipolar disorder is characterized by episodes in which the person’s
health conditions, psychosis and bipolar disorder. People with mood and activity levels are significantly disturbed. This disturbance
psychosis or bipolar disorder are at high risk of exposure to stigma, consists on some occasions of an elevation of mood and increased
discrimination and violation of their right to live with dignity. energy and activity (mania), and on others of a lowering of mood
and decreased energy and activity (depression). Characteristically,
Psychosis is characterised by distorted thoughts and perceptions, recovery is complete between episodes. People who experience only
as well as disturbed emotions and behaviours. Incoherent or irrele- manic episodes are also classified as having bipolar disorder.
vant speech may also be present. Symptoms such as hallucinations –
hearing voices, or seeing things that are not there; delusions –
fixed, false beliefs; severe abnormalities of behaviour – disorganised
behaviour, agitation, excitement, inactivity, or hyperactivity;
disturbances of emotion – marked apathy, or disconnect between
reported emotion and observed affect, such as facial expression
and body language, may also be detected.
33

34
PSY 1
PSYCHOSES
PSY Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
E xplore other explanations for the symptoms Management Protocols
1. Bipolar disorder – manic episode
– EVALUATE FOR MEDICAL CONDITIONS
2. Psychosis
e.g. rule out delirium, medications and metabolic abnormalities
3. Special populations: women who are pregnant or
– EVALUATE FOR OTHER RELEVANT MNS CONDITIONS breast-feeding, adolescents, and older adults
Assess for acute manic episode Psychosocial Interventions
Evaluate if the person has psychosis
Pharmacological Interventions
1. Psychosis: initiation of antipsychotics
2. Manic episode: initiation of mood stabilizer or
antipsychotic; avoid antidepressants
FOLLOW-UP

PSY 1 Assessment
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOSES
M arked behavioural changes, neglecting F ixed false beliefs not shared by others in
usual responsibilities related to work, the person’s culture.
school, domestic or social activities.
H earing voices or seeing things that are
A gitated, aggressive behaviour, decreased not there.
or increased activity.
L ack of realization that one is having
mental health problems.
1
Are there any other explanations for the symptoms?
EVALUATE FOR MEDICAL CONDITIONS
By history, clinical examination, or laboratory findings, are there signs and symptoms
suggesting delirium due to an acute physical condition, e.g. infection, cerebral malaria,
dehydration, metabolic abnormalities (such as hypoglycaemia or hyponatraemia);
or medication side effects, e.g. due to some antimalarial medication or steroids?
Assess and manage the
acute physical condition, and
refer to emergency services/
specialist as needed.
If symptoms persist after management
of the acute cause, go to STEP 2
PSYCHOSES 35

36
PSY 1
PSYCHOSES Assessment
»
EVALUATE FOR DEMENTIA, DEPRESSION, DRUG/
ALCOHOL INTOXICATION OR WITHDRAWAL.
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE
AGITATION AND/OR AGRESSION
Consider consultation with a mental If the person presents with either acute
health specialist for management of agitation and/or acute agression
concurrent conditions. Go to “Management of persons with
agitated and/or aggressive behaviour”
Manage concurrent conditions.
(Table 5) in this module before
Go to relevant modules.
continuing.
2
Is the person having an acute manic episode?
Have several of the following symptoms occurred simultaneously, lasting for at least 1 week, and severely enough
to interfere significantly with work and social activities or requiring confinement or hospitalization:
– Elevated or irritable mood – Loss of normal social inhibitions such – Being easily distracted
– Decreased need for sleep as sexual indiscretion – Unrealistically inflated self-esteem
– Increased activity, feeling of increased – Impulsive or reckless behaviours such as
energy, increased talkativeness or excessive spending, making important
rapid speech decisions without planning
Suspect
CLINICAL TIP Persons with bipolar disorder can
BIPOLAR DISORDER Manic Episode
experience manic episodes only or a combination of manic
and depressive episodes in their lifetime.
To learn how to assess and manage depressive episode
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK
»
of bipolar disorder, go to DEP. Go to PROTOCOL 1
OF SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
»
before continuing. Go to SUI.

3
Does the person have psychosis?
Does the person have at least two of the following:
– Delusions, fixed false beliefs not shared by others in the person’s culture
– Hallucinations, hearing voices or seeing things that are not there
– Disorganized speech and/or behaviour, e.g. incoherent/irrelevant speech such as mumbling
or laughing to self, strange appearance, signs of self-neglect or appearing unkempt
Suspect
Consider consultation with specialist
to review other possible causes of PSYCHOSIS
psychosis.
Go to PROTOCOL 2
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK
OF SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
»
before continuing. Go to SUI.
PSYCHOSES 37

38
PSY 2
PSYCHOSES Management
PSY 2 Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
1 2
Manic Episode in Bipolar Disorder Psychosis
» »
Provide psychoeducation to the person and carers. (2.1) Provide psychoeducation to the person and carers. (2.2)
» »
Pharmacological Intervention. (2.6) Begin antipsychotic medication. (2.5)
Start with a low dose within the therapeutic range and
I f patient is on antidepressants – DISCONTINUE
increase slowly to the lowest effective dose, in order to reduce
to prevent further risk of mania.
the risk of side-effects.
– B egin treatment with lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, »
P romote functioning in daily activities. (2.3)
or with antipsychotics. Consider a short term (2-4 weeks
»
maximum) benzodiazepine for behavioural disturbance or E nsure safety of the person and safety of others.
agitation. »
P rovide regular follow-up.
»
Promote functioning in daily activities. (2.3) »
S upport rehabilitation in the community.
»
Ensure safety of the person and safety of others. »
R educe stress and strengthen social supports. (2.2)
»
Provide regular follow-up.
»
Support rehabilitation in the community.
»
Reduce stress and strengthen social supports. (2.2)

Special populations
Note that interventions may differ for PSYCHOSES in these populations
WOMEN WHO ARE PREGNANT OR BREASTFEEDING ADOLESCENTS
» Liaise with maternal health specialists to organize care. » Consider consultation with mental health
» Consider consultation with mental health specialist if available. specialist.
» »
Explain the risk of adverse consequences for the mother and her baby, including obstetric In adolescents with psychotic or bipolar
complications and psychotic relapses, particularly if medication stopped. disorder, risperidone can be offered as a
» treatment option only under supervision of
Consider pharmacological intervention when appropriate and available. See below.
a specialist.
»
Pharmacological Interventions If treatment with risperidone is not feasible,
haloperidol or chlorpromazine may be
PSYCHOSIS MANIC EPISODE IN BIPOLAR DISORDER used only under supervision of a specialist.
» »
In women with psychosis who are planning AVOID VALPROATE, LITHIUM and
a pregnancy or pregnant or breastfeeding, CARBAMAZEPINE during pregnancy and
low-dose oral haloperidol, or chlorpromazine breastfeeding due to the risk of birth defects.
may be considered. »
Consider low-dose haloperidol with caution
» OLDER ADULTS
Anticholinergics should NOT prescribed and in consultation with a specialist, if available.
to women who are pregnant due to extrapyra- »
Weigh the risks and benefits of medications in
midal side-effects of antipsychotic medications,
women of childbearing age. »
Use lower doses of medication.
except in cases of acute, short-term use.
»
» Depot antipsychotics should not be routinely If a pregnant woman develops acute mania » Anticipate an increased risk of drug-drug
while taking mood stabilizers, consider switching
prescribed to women with psychotic disorders interactions.
to low dose haloperidol.
who are planning a pregnancy, pregnant, or
CAUTION
breastfeeding because there is relatively little
Antipsychotics carry an increased risk of
information on their safety in this population.
cerebrovascular events and death in older
adults with dementia-related psychosis.
PSYCHOSES 39

40
PSY 2
PSYCHOSES Management
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.1 Psychoeducation 2.3 Promote functioning in daily
Recommend avoiding alcohol, cannabis or other non-
prescription drugs, as they can worsen the psychotic or living activities
Key messages for the person and their carers: bipolar symptoms.
Continue regular social, educational and occupational
Explain that the symptoms are due to a mental health Advise them about maintaining a healthy lifestyle, e.g. a
activities as much as possible. It is best for the person to have
condition, that psychosis and bipolar disorders can be balanced diet, physical activity, regular sleep, good personal
a job or to be otherwise meaningfully occupied.
treated, and that the person can recover. Clarify common hygiene, and no stressors. Stress can worsen psychotic
misconceptions about psychosis and bipolar disorder. symptoms. Note: Lifestyle changes should be continued as long Facilitate inclusion in economic activities, including culturally
as needed, potentially indefinitely. These changes should be
appropriate supported employment.
Do not blame the person or their family or accuse them
planned and developed for sustainability.
of being the cause of the symptoms. Offer life skills training and/or social skills training to enhance
independent living skills for people with psychosis and bipolar
Educate the person and the family that the person needs
2.2 Reduce stress and strengthen
disorders and for their families and/or carers.
to take the prescribed medications and return for follow-up
social supports
regularly. Facilitate, if available and needed, independent living and
supported housing that is culturally and contextually appropriate
Explain that return and/or worsening of symptoms are
Coordinate with available health and social resources to meet in the community.
common and that it is important to recognize these early
the family’s physical, social, and mental health needs.
and visit to the health facility as soon as possible.
Identify the person’s prior social activities that, if reinitiated, 2.4 General advice for carers
Plan a regular work or school schedule that avoids sleep
would have the potential to provide direct or indirect psycho-
deprivation and stress for both the person and the carers.
logical and social support, e.g. family gatherings, outings with Do not try to convince the person that his or her beliefs or
Encourage the person to solicit advice about major decisions
friends, visiting neighbors, social activities at work sites, sports, experiences are false or not real. Try to be neutral and
especially ones involving money or major commitments.
and community activities. Encourage the person to resume supportive, even when the person shows unusual behaviour.
these social activities and advise family members about this.
Avoid expressing constant or severe criticism or hostility
Encourage the person and carers to improve social towards the person with psychosis.
CLINICAL TIP
support systems.
Build rapport with the person. Give the person freedom of movement. Avoid restraining the
Mutual trust between the person and the person, while also ensuring that their basic security and that
health-care provider is critical to ensure CLINICAL TIP of others is met.
treatment adherence and long-term outcomes. Ensure persons with psychosis are
In general it is better for the person to live with family or
treated with respect and dignity. For
community members in a supportive environment outside of
»
further details go to ECP.
the hospital setting. Long-term hospitalization should be avoided.

PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS FOR SPECIAL POPULATIONS, (women who are pregnant or breastfeeding,
children/adolescents, and older adults), see detailed recommendations.
2.5 Psychosis 2.6 Manic Episode in Bipolar Disorder
Antipsychotics should routinely be offered to a person If patient is on antidepressants: CAUTION
with psychosis.
For women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, avoid
DISCONTINUE ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Start antipsychotic medication immediately. See Table 1.
valproate, lithium and carbamazepine. Use of low-dose
to prevent further risk of mania.
Prescribe one antipsychotic at a time. haloperidol is recommended with caution and under the
Begin treatment with lithium, valproate, carba- care of a specialist, if available.
Start at lowest dose and titrate up slowly to reduce risk of
mazepine, or with antipsychotics (see Table 3).
side effects. Consider a short term (2-4 weeks maximum)
Try the medication at a typically effective dose for at Lithium: consider using lithium as first line treatment of benzodiazepine for behavioural disturbances or
least 4-6 weeks before considering it ineffective. bipolar disorder only if clinical and laboratory monitoring are agitation:
available, a nd prescribe only under specialist supervision. If
Continue to monitor at that dose as frequently as possible and – Persons with mania who are experiencing agitation may
laboratory examinations are not available or feasible, lithium
as required for the first 4-6 weeks of therapy. If there is no benefit from short-term ( 2-4 weeks maximum) use of a
should be avoided and valproate or carbamazepine should
improvement, see Follow-up and Table 4. be considered. Erratic compliance or stopping lithium benzodiazepine such as diazepam.
Monitor weight, blood pressure, fasting sugar, cholesterol and treatment suddenly may increase the risk of relapse. Do not – Benzodiazepines should be discontinued gradually as soon
ECG for persons on antipsychotics if possible (see below). prescribe lithium where the lithium supply may be frequently as symptoms improve, as tolerance can develop.
interrupted. Obtain kidney and thyroid function, complete
blood count, ECG, and pregnancy tests before beginning Continue maintenance treatment for at least 2 years
CAUTION! treatment if possible. after the last bipolar episode.
Side effects to look for:
Valproate and Carbamazepine: Consider these – Lithium or valproate can be offered for the maintenance
MANI CO– L EAxRt rDaIpSOyrRaDmEidal side effects (EPS): akathisia, acute medications if clinical or laboratory monitoring for lithium is treatment of bipolar disorder. If treatment with one of
dystonic reactions, tremor, cog- wheeling, muscular rigidity, not available or if specialist is not available to supervise these agents is not feasible, haloperidol, chloropromazine
and tardive dyskinesia. Treat with anticholinergic medications
lithium prescription. or carbamazepine may be used. Offer maintenance
when indicated and available (see Table 2).
treatment in primary care settings under specialist
Haloperidol and risperidone: consider haloperidol and
– Metabolic changes: weight gain, high blood pressure, supervision.
increased blood sugar and cholesterol. risperidone only if no clinical or laboratory monitoring is
available to start lithium or valproate. Risperidone can be
– ECG changes (prolonged QT interval): monitor ECG
used as an alternative to haloperidol in individuals with
if possible.
bipolar mania if availability can be assured, and cost is not a
– Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS): a rare,
constraint.
potentially life-threatening disorder characterized by muscular
rigidity, elevated temperature, and high blood pressure.
PSYCHOSES 41

42
PSY 2
PSYCHOSES Management
TABLE 1: Antipsychotic medications
MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
HALOPERIDOL Start 1.5-3 mg daily. Common: sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, Caution in patients with: kidney disease, liver disease,
Increase as needed (maximum 20 mg daily). dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation. cardiac disease, long QT syndrome or taking QT-prolonging medications.
Route: oral (p.o.) or intramuscular (i.m.). Monitor ECG if possible.
Serious: orthostatic hypotension, extrapyramidal side
effects (EPS), ECG changes (prolonged QT interval),
weight gain, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (NMS).
RISPERIDONE Start 1 mg daily. Common: sedation, dizziness, tachycardia. Caution in patients with: cardiac disease.
Increase to 2-6 mg daily (maximum 10 mg).
Route: p.o. Serious: orthostatic hypotension, metabolic effects (elevated Drug-drug interactions: carbamazepine can reduce levels of
lipids, insulin resistance, weight gain), EPS, elevated prolactin, risperidone, whereas fluoxetine can increase levels.
sexual dysfunction, NMS.
CHLORPROMAZINE Start 25-50 mg daily. Common: sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, dry mouth, Contraindications: impaired consciousness, bone marrow depression,
Increase to 75-300 mg daily (up to 1000 mg urinary retention, constipation, tachycardia. pheochromocytoma.
may be necessary for severe cases).
Route: p.o. Serious: orthostatic hypotension, syncope, EPS, Caution in patients with: respiratory disease, kidney disease, liver
photosensitivity, weight gain, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, disease, glaucoma, urinary retention, cardiac disease, long QT syndrome
sexual dysfunction, priapism, NMS, agranulocytosis, or taking QT-prolonging medications. Monitor ECG if possible.
jaundice.
Drug-drug interactions:
– Increases effects of blood pressure lowering medications.
– Lowers blood pressure if combined with epinephrine.
– Levels may be increased by antimalarials including quinine.
FLUPHENAZINE Start 12.5 mg. Common: sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, dry mouth, Contraindications: impaired consciousness, parkinsonism.
depot/long-acting Use 12.5-50 mg every 2-4 weeks. urinary retention, constipation, tachycardia.
Route: i.m. in gluteal region. Caution in patients with: cardiac disease, kidney disease, liver disease.
Serious: orthostatic hypotension, syncope, EPS, Use with caution in older adults.
Avoid in women who are pregnant/ photosensitivity, weight gain,galactorrhea, amenorrhea,
breastfeeding. sexual dysfunction, priapism, NMS, agranulocytosis, Drug-drug interactions:
jaundice. – Increases effects of blood pressure lowering medications.
Do not use in children/adolescents. – Can lower blood pressure if used with epinephrine.

TABLE 2: Anticholinergic medications
(for treatment of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) Avoid in women who are pregnant or breastfeeding if possible.
MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
BIPERIDEN Start 1 mg twice daily. Common: sedation, confusion and memory Caution in patients with: cardiac, liver, or kidney disease.
Increase to 3-12 mg daily. disturbance (especially in older adults), tachycardia, dry
Drug-drug interactions: Caution when combining with other
Route: p.o or intravenous (i.v.). mouth, urinary retention and constipation.
anticholinergic medications.
TRIHEXYPHENIDYL Start 1 mg daily. Rarely, angle-closure glaucoma, myasthenia gravis and
(Benzhexol) Increase to 4-12 mg per day in 3-4 divided doses gastrointestinal obstruction.
(maximum 20 mg daily).
Route: p.o
TABLE 3: Mood stabilizers
Avoid in women who are pregnant or breastfeeding if possible.
MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
LITHIUM Start 300 mg daily. Increase gradually every Common: sedation, cognitive problems, tremor, : Contraindicated in patients with: severe cardiac or kidney disease.
7 days until target blood level reached (maximum impaired coordination, hypotension, leukocytosis,
Dehydration can increase lithium levels.
600-1200 mg daily). Monitor every 2-3 months. polyuria, polydipsia, nausea, diarrhea, weight gain, hair
Use only if clinical
Route: p.o loss, rash. Drug-drug interactions: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
and laboratory monitoring angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACE inhibitor), thiazide diuretics,
Target blood levels: 0.6-1.0 mEq/liter Serious: diabetes insipidus, hypothyroidism,
are available. metronidazole, and tetracycline can increase lithium levels.
– In acute manic episode: 0.8-1.0 mEq/liter ECG changes (arrhythmia, sick sinus syndrome,
– For maintenance treatment: 0.6-0.8 mEq/liter. T-wave changes). Lithium toxicity can cause seizures, delirium, coma, and death.
6 months on medication is needed to determine full
effectiveness of maintenance treatment.
SODIUM VALPROATE Start 500 mg daily. Common: sedation, headache, tremor, ataxia, nausea, Caution in patients with: underlying or suspected hepatic disease.
Increase slowly to 1000-2000 mg daily vomiting, diarrhea, weight gain, transient hair loss. Monitor liver function tests and platelets if possible.
(maximum 60 mg/kg/day).
Serious: impaired hepatic function, Drug-drug interactions:
Route: p.o
thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, drowsiness/ Valproate levels decreased by carbamazepine, increased by aspirin.
Preferred choice in persons living with confusion, liver failure, hemorrhagic pancreatitis.
HIV
HIV/AIDS due to drug-drug interactions.
CARBAMAZEPINE Start 200 mg daily. Common: sedation, confusion, dizziness, ataxia, Contraindicated in patients with: history of blood disorders,
Increase by 200 mg weekly to 400-600 mg daily in double vision, nausea, diarrhea, benign leucopenia. kidney, liver, or cardiac disease.
two divided doses (maximum 1200 mg daily).
Serious: hepatotoxicity, cardiac conduction delay, Drug-drug interactions.
Route: p.o
low sodium levels, severe rash. – May reduce the effects of hormonal birth control, immunosuppressants,
Note: Dose may need to be adjusted after antiepileptics, antipsychotics, methadone and some antiretrovirals.
2 weeks due to induction of its own metabolism. – Levels can be increased by certain antifungals and antibiotics.
PSYCHOSES 43

44
PSY 2
PSYCHOSES Management
TABLE 4: Review adherence, side effects and dosing based on clinical situation/ presentation
CLINICAL SITUATION ACTION
The person is not tolerating antipsychotic Reduce the dose of antipsychotic medication.
medication, i.e. the person has If side-effects persist, consider switching to another antipsychotic medication.
extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) or other Consider adding anticholinergic medication for short-term use to treat EPS if these strategies fail or if symptoms are severe (see Table 2).
serious side effects
Adherence to treatment is Discuss reasons for non-adherence with the person and carers.
unsatisfactory And provide information regarding importance of medication.
Consider depot/long-acting injectable antipsychotic medication as an option after discussing possible side effects of oral versus
depot preparations.
Treatment response is inadequate Verify that the person is receiving an effective dose of medication. If the dose is low, increase gradually to lowest effective dose to reduce
(i.e. symptoms persist or worsen) despite the risk of side effects.
adherence to medication Enquire about alcohol or substance use and take measures to reduce this. Go to » SUB.
Enquire about recent stressful event that may have led to worsening of clinical condition and take measures to reduce stress.
»
Review symptoms to rule out physical and/or other priority MNS conditions. Go to PSY 1, see STEP 1
Consider risperidone as an alternative to haloperidol or chlorpromazine, if cost and availability are not constraints.
If the person does not respond to adequate dose and duration of more than one antipsychotic medication, using one medicine at a time,
then antipsychotic combination treatment may be considered; preferably under the supervision of a specialist, with close clinical monitoring.
Consider consultation with a specialist for the use of clozapine in those who have not responded to other antipsychotic medications
at adequate doses and durations. Only use clozapine under the supervision of a specialist and only if routine laboratory monitoring is available,
due to the risk of life-threatening agranulocytosis.

TABLE 5: Management of Persons with Agitated and/or Aggressive Behaviour
ASSESSMENT COMMUNICATION SEDATION AND USE OF MEDICATION
Attempt to communicate with the person. Safety is first! Sedate as appropriate to prevent injury.
Evaluate for underlying cause: Remain calm and encourage the patient to talk For agitation due to psychosis or mania, consider use of haloperidol
– Check Blood Glucose. If low, give glucose. about his or her concerns. 2mg p.o./i.m. hourly up to 5 doses (maximum 10 mg).
Caution: high doses of haloperidol can cause dystonic reactions.
Use a calm voice and try to address the concerns
– Check vital signs, including temperature and oxygen
Use biperiden to treat acute reactions.
if possible.
saturation. Give oxygen if needed.
For agitation due to ingestion of substances, such as
Listen attentively. Devote time to the person.
– Rule out delirium and medical causes
alcohol/sedative withdrawal or stimulant intoxication,
including poisoning. Never laugh at the person.
use diazepam 10-20 mg p.o. and repeat as needed. Go to SUB.
– Rule out drug and alcohol use. Do not be aggressive back.
In cases of extreme violence
Specifically consider stimulant intoxication and/or
Try to find the source of the problem and solutions – Seek help from police or staff
alcohol/sedative withdrawal. Go to SUB.
for the person.
– Use haloperidol 5mg i.m., repeat in 15-30mins if needed
– Rule out agitation due to psychosis or manic
Involve carers and other staff members. (maximum 15 mg)
episode in bipolar disorder. Go to Assessment,
»
PSY 1.
Remove from the situation anyone who may be a – Consult a specialist.
trigger for the aggression.
if the person remains agitated, recheck oxygen saturation,
If all possibilities have been exhausted and the person
vital signs and glucose. Consider pain. Refer to hospital.
is still aggressive, it may be necessary to use medication
Once agitation subsides, refer to the master chart (MC) and
(if available) to prevent injury.
select relevant modules for assessment.
Special Populations:
Consult a specialist for treatment.
PSYCHOSES 45

46
PSY 3
PSYCHOSES Follow -up
PSY 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
PSYCHOSIS
1
»
Initial follow-up should be as
frequent as possible, even daily,
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT until acute symptoms respond to
treatment.
»
Regular follow-up is needed. Once
Is the person improving? symptoms respond, monthly to
quarterly follow-up is recommended
(based on clinical need and feasibility
factors such as staff availability,
distance from clinic, etc.)
»
Continue with treatment plan.
»
Decrease frequency of follow-up once
symptoms have subsided.
»
Follow-up as needed.
Is the person taking medication?
SKIP to STEP 120
»
START ANTIPSYCHOTIC MEDICATIONS
(Go to Table 1).
»
Maintain a high frequency of contact until symptoms
start to respond to treatment.
»
Ensure that person has been on a typical
»
effective dose for minimum of 4-6 weeks. Involve the person and carers in treatment plan
changes and decisions.
»
Maintain a high frequency of contact until
symptoms start to respond to treatment.
»
Involve the person and carers in treatment plan
changes and decisions.

2
ROUTINELY MONITOR TREATMENT
»
Review psychosocial interventions.
»
If on medication, review adherence, side effects and dosing (Table 4).
Check weight, blood pressure, and blood glucose.
»
If the person starts to use any other medications with potential drug-drug
interactions, consider reviewing the medication dose.
»
Ask regarding the onset of symptoms, prior episodes, and details of any
previous or current treatment.
3
DISCONTINUE MEDICATIONS
Person with first episode, relapse, Person with psychotic symptoms
or worsening of psychosis symptoms: persisting more than 3 months:
» »
Consider discontinuation of medications Consider discontinuation of medications if person is in
12 MONTHS after symptoms have resolved. FULL REMISSION of symptoms for several years.
»
Discuss risks of relapse against long-term medication side-effects with person and family.
»
If possible, consult a specialist.
»
Gradually and slowly reduce the medication dose. When medications are withdrawn,
individuals and family members need to be educated to detect early symptoms of relapse.
Close clinical monitoring is recommended.
PSYCHOSES 47

48
PSY 3
PSYCHOSES Follow -up
PSY 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
MANIC EPISODE IN BIPOLAR DISORDER »
For acute mania: Initial follow-up
should be as frequent as possible,
even daily, until acute symptoms
1
respond to treatment. Once
symptoms respond, monthly to
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT
quarterly follow-up is recommended.
»
For persons not currently in manic
or depressed states, follow-up at
Is the person improving?
least every three months. Consider
» more frequent follow up when
Follow-up as needed until symptoms
needed. Monitor closely for relapse.
have subsided.
»
Continue maintenance medications
for at least 2 years.
SKIP to STEP 1 20
Is the person taking medication?
»
If appropriate, initiate medication.
»
Check dosing and side effects. Go to Table 1 or Table 3.
CLINICAL TIP
»
If switching to another Ensure that person has been on a typical effective dose of
medication, begin that medi- medication for a minimum of four to six weeks.
cation first and treat with » »
If on typical effective dose of medications for four to six weeks Review psychosocial interventions.
both medications for 2 weeks
with no improvement, consider switching medication. See Table 3. »
before tapering off the first Evaluate for medical problems.
»
medication. If response is still poor, consult a specialist.

2
ROUTINELY MONITOR TREATMENT
»
Review and provide psychosocial interventions.
»
If on medication, review adherence, side effects and dosing. See Table 4.
»
If the person starts any other medications with the potential for drug-drug
interactions, consider reviewing the medication dose.
3
DISCONTINUE MEDICATIONS
Has the person been in full remission of symptoms with
no episodes of bipolar disorder for at least two years?
» »
Consider discontinuation of medications Routinely follow up and monitor treatment.
– Discuss with person/carer the risk of discontinuation.
– Consult a specialist regarding the decision to discontinue
maintenance treatment after 2 years.
– Reduce gradually over period of weeks or months.
PSYCHOSES 49

50
PSYCHOSES
PPSSYYCCHHOOSSEESS

EPILEPSY
Epilepsy is a chronic noncommunicable disorder of the brain, Seizures are caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain and
characterized by recurrent unprovoked seizures. Epilepsy is one are of two types: convulsive and non-convulsive. Non-convulsive
of the most common neurological disorders and with proper epilepsy has features such as change in mental status while con-
treatment, can be well controlled in the majority of people. vulsive epilepsy has features such as sudden abnormal movements,
including stiffening and shaking of the body. The latter is associated
Epilepsy has many causes. It may be genetic. Epilepsy may occur with greater stigma and higher morbidity and mortality. This module
in people who have a past history of birth trauma, brain injury covers only convulsive epilepsy.
(including head trauma and strokes), or brain infections. In some
people, no cause may be identified.
51

52
EPI
EPILEPSY
EPI Quick Overview
Acute presentation of seizures/convulsions warrants
emergency treatment & management
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
EMERGENCY: M anagement Protocol and
Assessment & management of acute Special Populations
convulsions
1. Epilepsy
2. Special Populations (women of childbearing age,
Assess if person has convulsive seizures children/adolescents, and people living with HIV)
Assess for an acute cause
Psychosocial Interventions
(e.g. neuroinfection, trauma, etc.)
Pharmacological Interventions
Assess if the person has epilepsy and
for any underlying causes (by history or
examination)
Assess for concurrent priority MNS
conditions FOLLOW-UP

EPI EMERGENCY
PERSON PRESENTS WITH
CONVULSION OR IS
UNRESPONSIVE AND STIFF
1
CLINICAL TIP:
Assessment and management Any sign of head or neck injury?
should occur simultaneously.
KEEP HEAD AND NECK STABLE
2
Check AIRWAY, BREATHING, CIRCULATION (ABCs) Place an intravenous (i.v.) line for medication/
Ensure the person has nothing in their airway, is breathing fluid administration if possible
well and has a stable pulse
DO NOT LEAVE THE PERSON ALONE
Check BLOOD PRESSURE, TEMPERATURE and RESPIRATORY RATE
DO NOT PUT ANYTHING IN THE MOUTH
Start timing the duration of the convulsions, if possible
FOR A PERSON WITH POSSIBLE HEAD INJURY,
Make sure the person is in a safe place and if possible, put NEUROINFECTION (FEVER) OR FOCAL DEFICITS,
them down on their side to help breathing; loosen any neckties or REFER URGENTLY TO HOSPITAL
clothing around the neck, take off eye glasses, and place something
soft under the head (if available)
EPILEPSY 53

54
EPI
EPILEPSY Emergency
SPECIAL POPULATION: Pregnancy/Post-partum
3
Is the woman in the second half of pregnancy OR
up to 1 week post partum AND has no past history of epilepsy?
SUSPECT ECLAMPSIA
Give magnesium sulphate 10 g
4
intramuscular (i.m.)
I f diastolic blood pressure >110 mmHg, GIVE MEDICATION TO STOP CONVULSIONS
give hydralazine 5 mg i.v. slowly (3-4min).
Repeat every 30 min until ≤ 90 mmHg;
Do not give more than 20 mg total
R EFER URGENTLY TO HOSPITAL IF NO I.V. ESTABLISHED IF I.V. ESTABLISHED
Give: S tart normal saline administration slowly
(30 drops/minute)
diazepam rectally
(adult 10 mg, child 1 mg/year of age) G ive glucose i.v.
(adult 5 ml of 50%; child 2-5 ml/kg of 10%)
OR
midazolam buccally/intranasally
G ive emergency medication:
(5-10 mg adult, child 0.2 mg/kg) – diazepam 10 mg i.v. (child 1mg/year of age i.v.)
OR
– lorazepam 4 mg i.v (child 0.1 mg/kg i.v.)

5
Have the convulsions stopped within
10 minutes of 1st dose of emergency medication?
Proceed to EPI 1 (Assessment)
GIVE 2nd DOSE OF EMERGENCY MEDICATION
6
Have the convulsions stopped?
Proceed to EPI 1 (Assessment)
R EFER URGENTLY TO HEALTH FACILITY
DO NOT GIVE MORE THAN 2 DOSES
OF EMERGENCY MEDICATION
EPILEPSY 55

56
EPI
EPILEPSY Emergency
7
IS THE PERSON IN STATUS EPILEPTICUS?
Convulsions continue after 2 doses of emergency medication, OR
No recovery in between convulsions
SKSSKKIPIIPP t ottoo S SSTTTEEEPPP 1111100000
(e.g. convulsions stopped after
second dose of emergency medication
STATUS EPILEPTICUS IS LIKELY
on arrival to health facility)
8 Management should occur in health facility
C ontinue to check AIRWAY, BREATHING, and CIRCULATION (ABCs)
G ive oxygen
M onitor need for intubation/ventilation continuously
9
GIVE ONE OF THE FOLLOWING MEDICATIONS INTRAVENEOUSLY
V ALPROIC ACID: P HENYOTIN:
20 mg/kg i.v. once up to maximum dose of 1 g, over 30 min 15-20 mg/kg i.v. up to max dose of 1 g, over 60 min
– use second i.v. line (DIFFERENT FROM DIAZEPAM)
P HENOBARBITAL:
PHENYTOIN CAUSES SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE IF
15-20 mg/kg i.v.* up to maximum dose of 1 g, over 100 mg/min
EXTRAVASATES, MUST HAVE GOOD I.V. LINE!
*If no i.v. access, can use i.m. phenobarbital (same dose as i.v.)

Have the convulsions stopped?
Use one of the other medications (if available) OR
additional 10 mg/kg phenytoin (given over 30 min)
Monitor for respiratory depression,
hypotension, arrhythmia.
10
E VALUATE (AND TREAT AS APPROPRIATE) FOR
UNDERLYING CAUSE OF CONVULSIONS:
– Neuroinfection (fever, stiff neck, headache, confusion)
– Substance use (alcohol withdrawal or drug ingestion)
– Trauma
– Metabolic abnormality (hypernatraemia or hypoglycaemia)
– Stroke (focal deficit)
– Tumor (focal deficit)
– Known epilepsy (prior history of seizures)
Have the convulsions stopped?
R EFER TO SPECIALIST
FOR FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC Proceed to EPI 1 (Assessment)
EVALUATION
EPILEPSY 57

58
EPI 1
EPILEPSY Assessment
CLINICAL TIP
EPI 1 Assessment
Syncope and pseudoseizures
should be considered during
initial evaluation and in cases of
treatment failure.
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF EPILEPSY
» Syncopal (fainting) spells often
are associated with flushing,
Convulsive movement or fits/seizures
sweating, pallor, and occasio-
During the convulsion:
nally a feeling of vision darken-
– Loss of consciousness or impaired consciousness ing prior to an episode. Mild
– Stiffness, rigidity shaking may occur at the end.
– Tongue bite, injury, incontinence of urine or faeces
» Pseudoseizures are typically
After the convulsion: fatigue, drowsiness, sleepiness, confusion, associated with a stress trigger.
Episodes are often prolonged
abnormal behaviour, headache, muscle aches, or weakness on
and can involve nonrhythmic
one side of the body
jerking of the body, eyes may be
closed, and pelvic thrusting is
often seen. There is typically a
rapid return to baseline after
1
the episode. If pseudoseizures
are suspected, go to OTH.
Does the person have convulsive seizures?
Has the person had convulsive movements
lasting longer than 1-2 minutes?
Convulsive seizures unlikely
Consult a specialist for recurrent episodes
Follow-up in 3 months

Has the person had at least 2 of the following symptoms during the episode(s)?
– Loss of consciousness or impaired consciousness – After the convulsion: fatigue, drowsiness,
– Stiffness, rigidity sleepiness, confusion, abnormal behaviour,
– Bitten or bruised tongue, bodily injury headache, muscle aches, or weakness on one
– Incontinence of faeces/urine side of the body
Convulsive seizures unlikely
Consult a specialist for recurrent episodes
Follow-up in 3 months
Suspect
CONVULSIVE SEIZURES
2
Is there an acute cause?
Is there neuroinfection or other possible causes of convulsions?
»
Check for signs and symptoms:
– Fever – Meningeal irritation – Metabolic abnormality – Alcohol or drug
– Headache (e.g. stiff neck) (e.g. hypogylcemia/ intoxication or
– Confusion – Head injury hyponatremia) withdrawal
Suspect EPILEPSY
EPILEPSY 59

60
EPI 1
EPILEPSY Assessment
IS IT A CHILD 6 MONTHS TO SKIP to STEP 3
»
6 YEARS OLD WITH A FEVER? EVALUATE & TREAT MEDICAL
CONDITION
»
REFER TO HOSPITAL
IF POSSIBLE FOR HEAD INJURY,
MENINGITIS, AND METABOLIC
Are the convulsions: ABNORMALITIES
– Focal: Starts in one part of the body
ANTIEPILEPTIC MEDICATION
– Prolonged: Lasts more than 15 min
NOT REQUIRED
– Repetitive: More than 1 episode during the
»
current illness Follow-up in 3 months to
assess for possible epilepsy
COMPLEX FEBRILE SEIZURE
R EFER TO HOSPITAL
FOR ADMISSION
SIMPLE FEBRILE SEIZURE
Look for cause (local Integrated Management
of Childhood Illness (IMCI) guidelines)
Observe over 24 hours
No antiepileptic treatment needed

3
Does the person have epilepsy?
CLINICAL TIP
Ask about:
– How frequent are the episodes?
Has the person had at least two seizures on two
– How many in the past year?
different days in the past year? – When was the last episode?
Does not meet criteria for epilepsy
Maintenance antiepileptic medication not necessary
Follow-up in 3 months and assess for possible
epilepsy EPILEPSY
is likely
Asses for underlying cause. Do a physical examination.
CLINICAL TIP
Physical examination should include
A re any of the following present?
neurologic examination and evaluate for
any focal deficits; e.g. any asymmetry in – Birth asphyxia or trauma history – Infection of the brain
strength or reflexes. – Head injury – Family history of seizures
R EFER TO SPECIALIST FOR FURTHER
EVALUATION OF CAUSE
EPILEPSY 61

62
EPI 1
EPILEPSY Assessment
4
Are there concurrent MNS conditions?
A ssess for other concurrent MNS conditions according to the
mhGAP-IG Master Chart (MC)
Please note persons with EPILEPSY are at higher risk for DEPRESSION, DISORDERS
DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE. CHILDREN AND ADOLSCENTS MAY HAVE ASSOCIATED MENTAL
AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS. SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
Go to PROTOCOL 1
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK
OF SUICIDE, ASSESS AND
MANAGE before continuing
to Protocol. Go to SUI.

EPI 2 Management
PROTOCOL
1
Provide psychoeducation to the person and carers (2.1)
Initiate antiepileptic medications (2.3)
Promote functioning in daily activities (2.2)
Special populations
Note that interventions are different for EPILEPSY in these populations
HIV
WOMAN OF CHILDBEARING AGE CHILD / ADOLESCENT PERSON LIVING WITH HIV
Concern: Risk of antiepileptic medication to fetus/child Concern: Effect of antiepileptic medication Concern: Drug interactions between antiepileptic
on development and/or behavior medications and antiretrovirals
Advise folate (5 mg/day) to prevent neural tube For those with a developmental disorder, When available, refer to specific drug interactions
defects, in ALL women of childbearing age. manage the condition. Go to CMH. for person’s antiretroviral regimen and antiepileptic
medication.
AVOID VALPROATE. For children with behavioural disorder, avoid
phenobarbital if possible. Manage the condition. Valproate is preferred due to fewer drug-drug
CAUTION If Pregnant:
Go to CMH. interactions.
– Avoid polytherapy. Multiple medications in combination
increase the risk of teratogenic effects during pregnancy. AVOID PHENYTOIN AND CARBAMAZEPINE
– If medications are stopped during pregnancy, WHEN POSSIBLE.
they should always be tapered.
– Advise delivery in hospital.
– At delivery, give 1 mg vitamin K i.m. to the newborn
to prevent haemorrhagic disease.
If breastfeeding, carbamazepine preferred to other
medication.
EPILEPSY 63

64
EPI 2
EPILEPSY Management
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.1 Psychoeducation 2.2 P romote functioning in daily
activities and community life
Provide information on: "What is a convulsion/epilepsy" Provide information on: How carers can manage
and the importance of medication. convulsion at home. »
Refer to Essential Care and Practice (ECP) for interventions
that promote functioning in daily living and community life.
“A convulsion is caused by excess electrical activity in the Lay person down, on their side, head turned to help breathing.
brain – it is not caused by witchcraft or spirits.” »
DO NOT PUT ANYTHING IN THEIR MOUTH OR RESTRAIN In addition, inform carers and people
“Epilepsy is the recurrent tendency for convulsions.” THE PERSON. with epilepsy that:
“It is a chronic condition, but if you take your medicine as
Ensure the person is breathing properly.
– People with epilepsy can lead normal lives.
prescribed, in the majority of people it can be fully Stay with person until the convulsion stops and they wake up. They can marry and have children.
controlled.”
Sometimes people with epilepsy know that a convulsion is
– Parents should not remove children with epilepsy from
The person may have several people helping them take care imminent. They should lie down somewhere safe if they have school.
of their convulsions. Discuss this with the person. that feeling.
– People with epilepsy can work in most jobs. However they
Ask the person to let you know if they are seeing a Epilepsy is not contagious. You cannot catch the disorder by should avoid jobs with high risk of injury to self or others
traditional or a faith healer, showing respect for this, but assisting the person experiencing convulsions. (e.g. working with heavy machinery).
emphasizing the need for being seen at a healthcare facility.
– People with epilepsy should avoid cooking on open fires
The person should also be informed that medicines and
Provide information on: When to get medical help. and swimming alone.
herbal products can sometimes have adverse interactions,
so the health care providers must know about everything – People with epilepsy should avoid excessive alcohol and
When a person with epilepsy appears to have trouble
they take. recreational substances, sleeping too little, or going to
breathing during a convulsion, they need immediate
places with flashing lights.
medical help.
CLINICAL TIP: When a person with epilepsy has a convulsion lasting longer – Local driving laws related to epilepsy should be observed.
Seizures lasting greater than 5 minutes are than 5 minutes outside of a health facility, they need to be – People with epilepsy may qualify for disability benefits.
a medical emergency – one should seek help taken to one.
immediately. – Community programs for people with epilepsy can provide
When a person with epilepsy is not waking up after a
assistance in jobs and support for both the person and
Most people with epilepsy can have normal convulsion, they need to be taken to a health facility.
family.
lives with good adherence to treatment.

PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
2.3 Initiate antiepileptic medications
Choose a medication that will be consistently available. CAUTION!
If special population (children, women of childbearing Check for drug-drug interactions. When used together, When possible, avoid use of sodium valproate in
age, person living with HIV), see relevant section of this antiepileptics may increase or reduce the effect of other pregnant women due to risk of neural tube defects.
module. antiepilepileptics. Antiepileptics may also reduce effect of
All anticonvulsant medications should be discontinued slowly as
Start with only one medication at lowest starting dose. hormonal birth control, immunosuppressants, antipsy- stopping them abruptly can cause seizure breakthrough.
chotics, methadone, and some antiretrovirals.
Increase dose slowly until convulsions are controlled.
Rarely, can cause severe bone marrow depression,
Consider monitoring blood count, blood chemistry and
hypersensitivity reactions including Stevens-Johnson
liver function tests, if available.
Syndrome, altered Vitamin D metabolism and Vitamin
K-deficient hemorrhagic disease of newborns.
TABLE 1: Antiepileptic medications
MEDICATION ORAL DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
CARBAMAZEPINE Adults: Common: Sedation, confusion, dizziness, ataxia, Caution in patients with history of blood disorders, kidney,
Start 100-200 mg daily in 2-3 divided doses. double vision, nausea, diarrhea, benign leukopenia. liver or cardiac disease.
Increase by 200 mg each week (max 1400mg daily).
Serious: Hepatotoxicity, cardiac conduction delay, Dose may need to be adjusted after 2 weeks due to induction of
Children: low sodium levels. its own metabolism.
Start 5 mg/kg daily in 2-3 divided doses. Increase
by 5 mg/kg daily each week (max 40mg/kg daily
OR 1400mg daily).
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding:
Use with caution.
EPILEPSY 65

66
EPI 2
EPILEPSY Management
TABLE 1: Antiepileptic medications (cont.)
MEDICATION ORAL DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
PHENOBARBITAL Adults: Common: Sedation, hyperactivity in children, ataxia, Contraindicated in patients with acute intermittent porphyria.
Start 60 mg daily in 1-2 divided doses. nystagmus, sexual dysfunction, depression.
Increase weekly by 2.5-5 mg (maximum 180 mg daily). Lower doses for patients with kidney or liver disease.
Serious: Liver failure (hypersensitivity reaction), decreased
Children: bone mineral density.
Start 2-3 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses.
Increase weekly by 1-2 mg/kg daily depending
on tolerance (maximum 6mg daily).
PHENYTOIN Adults: Common: Sedation, confusion, dizziness, tremor, motor Lower doses for patients with kidney or liver disease.
Start 150-200 mg daily in two divided doses. twitching, ataxia, double vision, nystagmus, slurred
Increase by 50 mg daily every 3-4 weeks speech, nausea, vomiting, constipation.
(max 400 mg daily).
Serious: Hematologic abnormalities, hepatitis,
Children: polyneuropathy, gum hypertrophy, acne, lymphadeno-
Start 3-4 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses. pathy, increase in suicidal ideation.
Increase by 5 mg/kg daily every 3-4 weeks
(maximum 300 mg per day).
Women who are pregnant or
breastfeeding: Avoid
Older adults: Use lower doses
SODIUM VALPROATE Adults: Common: Sedation, headache, tremor, ataxia, nausea, Use with caution if underlying or suspected hepatic disease.
Start 400 mg daily in 2 divided doses. vomiting, diarrhea, weight gain, transient hair loss.
Increase by 500 mg daily each week Drug-drug interactions: Valproate levels decreased by carbamazepine,
Serious: Impaired hepatic function, thrombocytopenia,
(maximum 3000 mg daily). increased by aspirin.
leukopenia, drowsiness/confusion (valproate-induced
Children: hyperammonemic encephalopathy, a sign of toxicity),
Start 15-20 mg/kg daily in 2-3 divided doses. liver failure, hemorrhagic pancreatitis.
Increase each week by 15 mg/kg daily
(max 15-40 mg/kg daily).
Women who are pregnant: Avoid
Older adults: Use lower doses

EPI 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
1 » Follow up should occur
every 3-6 months
REVIEW THE CURRENT CONDITION
Does the person have more than 50% seizure reduction in convulsion frequency?
IF THE PERSON IS NOT IMPROVING ON CURRENT DOSE:
»
Review adherence to medications.
»
Consider increase in medication dose as needed to
maximal dose if no adverse effects.
»
If response is still poor,
– Consider switching medication. The new medication
should be at an optimum dose before slowly discon-
tinuing the first.
»
If response is still poor,
– Review diagnosis.
– REFER TO SPECIALIST.
»
Follow-up more frequently.
CLINICAL TIP:
»
ADVERSE EFFECTS (e.g. drowsiness, nystagmus, diplopia, ataxia)
are from too high doses of medication for the person.
»
If there is an IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION (allergic reaction, bone
marrow depression, hepatic failure), switch antiepileptic medication.
EPILEPSY 67

68
EPI 3
EPILEPSY Follow-up
2
MONITOR TREATMENT
At every contact:
» »
Evaluate side-effects of medication including adverse effects Does the patient have any new symptoms of concern?
and idiosyncratic reactions (clinically and with appropriate laboratory tests Review for any new symptoms of depression and anxiety given
when available). high risk of co-morbidity with epilepsy.
» »
Provide psychoeducation and review psychosocial interventions. Is the patient on any new medications that may have interactions?
» (Many anticonvulsants have interactions with other medications). If so,
Is the person a woman of childbearing age and considering
consult a specialist.
pregnancy? If so, consult specialist.
3
CONSIDER MEDICATION DISCONTINUATION WHEN APPROPRIATE
Has the person been convulsion free for several years?
»
D iscuss risk of seizure occurrence with person/carer
IF THERE ARE NO PROBLEMS WITH MEDICATIONS (if epilepsy is due to head injury, stroke or neuroinfection,
» Continue at current dose. Correct dosing is lowest there is a higher risk of seizure recurrence off medication),
therapeutic dose for seizure control, while minimizing and risks and benefits of discontinuing medications.
adverse side-effects. » If in agreement, gradually take the person off
» Continue close follow-up and review for possible dis- medication by reducing the doses over 2 months and
continuation of medications once seizure free for at monitoring closely for seizure recurrence.
least two years.

CHILD & ADOLESCENT
MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS
This module covers assessment and management of developmental EMOTIONAL DISORDERS are among the leading mental health-
disorders, behavioural disorders, and emotional disorders in children related causes of the global burden of disease in young people.
and adolescents. Emotional disorders are characterized by increased levels of anxiety,
depression, fear, and somatic symptoms.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER is an umbrella term covering
disorders such as intellectual disability as well as autism spectrum Children and adolescents often present with symptoms of more
disorders. These disorders usually have a childhood onset, impair- than one condition and sometimes the symptoms overlap. The
ment or delay in functions related to central nervous system matu- quality of home and social educational environments influence
ration, and a steady course rather than the remissions and relapses children’s and adolescents’ wellbeing and functioning. Exploring
that tend to characterize many other mental disorders. and addressing psychosocial stressors along with opportunities
to activate supports are critical elements of the assessment and
BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS is an umbrella term that includes management plan.
specific disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and conduct disorders. Behavioural symptoms of varying
levels of severity are very common in the general population. Only
children and adolescents with a moderate to severe degree of psy-
chological, social, educational or occupational impairment in multiple
settings should be diagnosed as having behavioural disorders.
69

70
CMH
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS
CMH Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
A ssess for problems with development Management Protocols
1. Developmental Delay/Disorder
Assess for problems with inattention
2. Problems with Behaviour
or over-activity 3. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
4. Conduct Disorder
Assess for problems with emotions. If an 5. Problems with Emotions
6. Emotional disorders and Moderate to Severe Depression
adolescent, evaluate for moderate to severe
in Adolescents
depression
Psychosocial Interventions
Assess for repeated defiant, disobedient,
and aggressive behaviour
Assess for presence of other priority
MNS conditions
FOLLOW-UP
Assess the home environment
A ssess the school environment

TABLE 1: COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS BY AGE GROUP
May be reported by carer, self-reported or observed during the assessment process.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS EMOTIONAL DISORDERS
Infants and Young – Poor feeding, failure to thrive, poor motor tone, delay – Excessive crying, clinging to a carer, freezing (holding
Children (age <5) in meeting expected developmental milestones for the body very still and being silent) and/or tantrums
appropriate age (eg. smiling, sitting, interacting with – Extreme shyness or changes in functioning (e.g. new
others, sharing attention, walking, talking and toilet wetting or soiling behaviour or thumb sucking)
training – Diminished initiation of play and social interaction
– Sleep and eating difficulties
Ages 4-18
Middle Childhood – Delay in reading and writing – Excess over-activity: excessive running around, – Recurrent, unexplained physical symptoms
(age 6-12) – Delay in self-care such as dressing, bathing, extreme difficulties remaining seated, excessive (e.g. stomach ache, headache, nausea)
brushing teeth talking or moving restlessly – Reluctance or refusal to go to school
– Excessive inattention, absent-mindedness, – Extreme shyness or changes in functioning
repeatedly stopping tasks before completion and (e.g. new wetting or soiling behaviour or thumb
switching to other activities sucking)
Adolescents – Poor school performance – Excessive impulsivity: frequently doing things – Problems with mood, anxiety or worry (e.g. irritable,
(age 13-18) – Difficulty understanding instructions without forethought easily annoyed, frustrated or depressed mood, extreme
– Difficulty in social interaction and adjusting to changes – Repeated and continued behaviour that disturbs or rapid and unexpected changes in mood, emotional
others (e.g. unusually frequent and severe outbursts), excessive distress
tantrums, cruel behaviour, persistent and severe – Changes in functioning (e.g. difficulty concentrating,
disobedience, stealing) poor school performance, often wanting to be alone or
– Sudden changes in behaviour or peer relations, stay home)
including withdrawal and anger
All Ages – Difficulty carrying out daily activities considered – Excessive fear, anxiety or avoidance of specific
normal for the person’s age; difficulty understanding situations or objects (e.g. separation from caregivers,
instructions; difficulty in social interactions and adjusting social situations, certain animals or insects, heights,
to changes; difficulties or oddities in communication; closed spaces, sight of blood or injury)
restrictive/repetitive patterns of behaviours, interests – Changes in in sleeping and eating habits
and activities – Diminished interest or participation in activities
– Oppositional or attention-seeking behaviour
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 71

72
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
CMH 1 Assessment
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF CHILD & ADOLESCENT
MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS
Child/adolescent being seen for physical complaints or a general health assessment who has:
– Any of the typical presenting complaints of emotional, behavioural or developmental disorders (See Table 1)
– Risk factors such as malnutrition, abuse and/or neglect, frequent illness, chronic diseases (e.g. HIV/AIDS or history of difficult birth)
Carer with concerns about the child/adolescent’s:
– Difficulty keeping up with peers or carrying out daily activities considered normal for age
– Behaviour (e.g. too active, aggressive, having frequent and/or severe tantrums, wanting to be alone too much,
refusing to do regular activities or go to school)
Teacher with concerns about a child/adolescent
– e.g. easily distracted, disruptive in class, often getting into trouble, difficulty completing school work
Community health or social services worker with concerns about a child/adolescent
– e.g. rule- or law-breaking behaviour, physical aggression at home or in the community

CLINICAL TIP
1
»
Adolescents should always be
offered the opportunity to be
ASSESS FOR DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
seen on their own, without
carers present.
»
Clarify the confidential nature
of the discussion.
Assess all domains – motor, cognitive, social, communication, and adaptive.
»
Indicate in what circumstances
F or toddlers and young children: F or older children and adolescents: parents or other adults will be
given information.
Has the child had any difficulties with age- Are there difficulties with school (learning, reading,
»
Explore the presenting
appropriate milestones across all developmental and writing), communicating and interacting with
complaint with the child/
areas? others, self-care, and everyday household activities?
adolescent and carer.
SKIP to STEP 120
Suspect DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY / DISORDER
Are there signs/symptoms suggesting any of the following:
– Nutritional deficiency, including iodine deficiency – Acute or chronic infectious illness, including ear
– Anaemia infection and HIV/AIDS
– Malnutrition
Manage conditions using Integrated
Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)
(www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/
IMCI_chartbooklet) or other available guidelines.
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 73

74
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
Assess the child for visual and/or hearing impairment:
For vision assessment, see if the child fails to: For hearing assessment, see if the child fails to:
– Look at your eyes – Turn head to see someone behind them when they speak
– Follow a moving object with the head and eyes – Show reaction to loud noise
– Grab an object – Make a lot of different sounds (tata, dada, baba), if an infant
– Recognize familiar people
CONSULT WITH SPECIALIST FOR EVALUATION.
Go to PROTOCOL 1
2
ASSESS FOR PROBLEMS WITH
INATTENTION OR HYPERACTIVITY
Is the child/adolescent:
– Easily distracted, has difficulty completing tasks?
– Overactive?
– Moving restlessly?
– Unable to stay still for long?
SKIP to STEP 130

Are symptoms persistent, severe, and causing considerable difficulty with daily functioning?
Are ALL of the following true?
– Are symptoms present in multiple settings? – Is there considerable difficulty with daily
– Have they lasted at least 6 months? functioning in personal, family, social,
– Are they inappropriate for the child/ educational, occupational or other areas?
adolescent’s developmental level?
ADHD Consider
is unlikely PROBLEMS WITH BEHAVIOUR
Consider ADHD Go to PROTOCOL 2
SSKKIIPP ttoo SSTTEEPP 113300
Rule out physical conditions that can resemble ADHD.
Does the child/adolescent have any of the following:
– Thyroid diseases
– Acute or chronic infectious illness, including HIV/AIDS
– Uncontrolled pain e.g. from an ear infection, sickle cell disease
Treat the physical condition
Go to PROTOCOL 3
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 75

76
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
3
ASSESS FOR CONDUCT DISORDER
Does the child/adolescent show repeated aggressive, disobedient, or defiant behaviour, for example:
– Arguing with adults – Provocative behaviour
– Defying or refusing to comply with their requests or rules – Excessive levels of fighting or bullying
– Extreme irritability/anger – Cruelty to animals or people
– Frequent and severe temper tantrums – Severe destructiveness to property, fire-setting
– Difficulty getting along with others – Stealing, repeated lying, truancy from school, running away from home
CONDUCT DISORDER
SKIP to STEP 140
is unlikely
CLINICAL TIP: AGE-APPROPRIATE DISRUPTIVE OR
CHALLENGING BEHAVIOUR IN CHILDREN/ADOLESCENTS
Toddlers and – Refusing to do what they are told, breaking rules, arguing, whining,
young children exaggerating, saying things that aren’t true, denying they did anything wrong,
(age 18 months – being physically aggressive and blaming others for their misbehaviour.
5 years)
– Brief tantrums (emotional outbursts with crying, screaming, hitting, etc.),
usually lasting less than 5 minutes and not longer than 25 minutes, typically
occur less than 3 times per week. Developmentally typical tantrums should
not result in self-injury or frequent physical aggression toward others, and
the child can typically calm themselves down afterward.
Middle Childhood – Avoidance of or delay in following instructions, complaining or arguing with
(age 6-12) adults or other children, occasionally losing their temper.
Adolescents – Testing rules and limits, saying that rules and limits are unfair or unnecessary,
(age 13-18) occasionally being rude, dismissive, argumentative or defiant with adults.

Are symptoms persistent, severe, and inappropriate for the
child/adolescent’s developmental level:
– Symptoms are present in different settings (e.g. at home, at school and in
other social settings).
– Symptoms have been present for at least 6 months.
– More severe than ordinary childish mischief or adolescent rebelliousness.
– Is there considerable difficulty with daily functioning in personal, family, social,
educational, occupational or other areas?
Consider
PROBLEMS WITH Consider
BEHAVIOUR CONDUCT DISORDER
Go to PROTOCOL 2 Go to PROTOCOL 4
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 77

78
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
4
ASSESS FOR EMOTIONAL DISORDERS
(prolonged, disabling distress involving sadness, fearfulness, anxiety or irritability)
Ask if the child/adolescent:
– Is often feeling irritable, easily annoyed, down or sad? – Often complains of headaches, stomach-aches or sickness?
– Has lost interest in or enjoyment of activities? – Is often unhappy, down-hearted or tearful?
– Has many worries or often seems worried? – Avoids or strongly dislikes certain situations (e.g. separation
– Has many fears or is easily scared? from carers, meeting new people, or closed spaces)?
SKIP to STEP 150
CLINICAL TIP: AGE-APPROPRIATE FEARS AND
ANXIETIES IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
Babies & Toddlers – Fear of strangers, distress when separating
(age 9 months – 2 years) from caregivers
Young Children – Fear of storms, fire, water, darkness,
(age 2-5) nightmares, and animals
Middle Childhood – Fear of monsters, ghosts, germs, natural
(age 6-12) disasters, physical illness, and being badly injured
– Anxiety about school or about performing in
front of others
Adolescents – Fear of rejection by peers, performing in
(age 13-18) front of others, physical illness, medical
procedures, catastrophes (e.g. war, terrorist
attack, disasters)

Is there considerable difficulty with daily functioning in personal,
family, social, educational, occupational or other areas?
Consider
PROBLEMS WITH
EMOTIONS
Consider Go to PROTOCOL 5
EMOTIONAL DISORDER
SKIP to STEP 150
Rule out physical conditions that can resemble or exacerbate emotional disorders.
Are there any signs/symptoms suggesting:
– Thyroid diseases – Obesity – Medication side-effects
– Infectious illness, including HIV/AIDS – Malnutrition (e.g. from corticosteroids or
– Anaemia – Asthma inhaled asthma medications)
Manage the physical condition. Go to PROTOCOL 6
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 79

80
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
In adolescents, assess for moderate to severe depression.
Does the adolescent have problems with mood (feeling irritable, down or sad)
OR has lost interest in or enjoyment of activities?
SKIP to STEP 150
Has the adolescent had several of the following additional symptoms most days for the last 2 weeks?
– Disturbed sleep or sleeping too much – Fatigue or loss of energy – Talking or moving more slowly than usual
– Significant change in appetite or weight – Reduced concentration – Hopelessness
(decrease or increase) – Indecisiveness – Suicidal thoughts or acts
– Beliefs of worthlessness or excessive guilt – Observable agitation or physical restlessness
Is there considerable difficulty with daily functioning in personal,
family, social, educational, occupational or other areas?
Consider
Go to PROTOCOL 5
PROBLEMS WITH
EMOTIONS
SKIP to STEP 150

CLINICAL TIP
Delusions or hallucinations may be present. If
Consider DEPRESSION
present, treatment for depression needs to be
adapted. CONSULT A SPECIALIST
Rule out a history of manic episode(s) and normal
Go to PROTOCOL 6
»
reaction to recent major loss. See DEP.
5
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK
ASSESS FOR OTHER PRIORITY MNS CONDITIONS OF SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
»
before continuing. Go to SUI.
Are there any other concurrent MNS conditions? Assess according to the
»
mhGAP-IG Master Chart. See MC.
Do not forget to assess for disorders due to substance use. See » SUB.
For children with developmental delay/disorders, do not forget to assess for epilepsy. See » EPI.
ASSESS AND MANAGE
concurrent MNS conditions
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 81

82
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
CLINICAL TIP CLINICAL TIP:
6
RED FLAGS FOR CHILD MALTREATMENT
A sk the child/adolescent directly
about these exposures when
ASSESS THE HOME ENVIRONMENT CLINICAL FEATURES
developmentally appropriate and safe
to do so (e.g. not in the presence of a Physical abuse
carer who may have committed the – Injuries (e.g. bruises, burns, strangulation marks or marks
maltreatment). Are the emotional, behavioural or developmental problems a from a belt, whip, switch or other object)
– Any serious or unusual injury without an explanation or
A dolescents should always be offered
reaction to or aggravated by a distressing or frightening situation?
with an unsuitable explanation
the opportunity to be seen on their own, Sexual abuse
Assess for:
without carers present. – Genital or anal injuries or symptoms that are medically
Clinical features or any element in the clinical history that suggest
unexplained
maltreatment or exposure to violence (see CLINICAL TIP).
– Sexually transmitted infections or pregnancy
– Sexualised behaviours (e.g. indication of age-inappropriate
Any recent or ongoing severe stressors (e.g. illness or death of a
sexual knowledge)
family member, difficult living and financial circumstances, being
Neglect
bullied or harmed).
– Being excessively dirty, unsuitable clothing
– Signs of malnutrition, very poor dental health
Emotional abuse and all other forms of maltreatment
Any sudden or significant change in the behaviour or
emotional state of the child/adolescent that is not better
explained by another cause, such as:
– Unusual fearfulness or severe distress (e.g. inconsolable crying)
– Self-harm or social withdrawal
Refer to child protection services if necessary – Aggression or running away from home
– Indiscriminate affection seeking from adults
Explore and manage stressors
– Development of new soiling and wetting behaviours, thumb
Ensure child/adolescent’s safety as a first priority sucking
Reassure the child/adolescent that all children/adolescents need to
ASPECTS OF CARER INTERACTION WITH THE
be protected from abuse
CHILD/ADOLESCENT
Provide information about where to seek help for any ongoing abuse
Arrange additional support including referral to specialist Persistently unresponsive behaviour, especially toward an
infant (e.g. not offering comfort or care when the child/
Contact legal and community resources, as appropriate and as mandated
adolescent is scared, hurt or sick)
Consider additional psychosocial interventions Hostile or rejecting behaviour
Using inappropriate threats (e.g. to abandon the child/
Ensure appropriate follow-up
adolescent) or harsh methods of discipline

CLINICAL TIP
Do the carers have any priority MNS condition that could impact »
Depressive disorder in carers
their ability to care for the child/adolescent? can worsen emotional, behavioural
or developmental disorders in
Consider especially depression and disorders due to substance use.
their children/adolescents.
Assess and manage for carer
MNS conditions.
Go to Management 2.6 (Carer support)
Is the child getting adequate opportunities for play and
social interaction/communication at home?
Consider asking:
With whom does the child spend most of their time?
How do you/they play with the child? How often?
How do you/they communicate with the child? How often?
Provide advise on age-appropriate stimulation
and parenting. Refer to Care for Child
Development http://www.who.int/maternal_
child_adolescent/documents/care_child_
development/en/
Consider need for additional support for the
child including referral to child protection services
where available.
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 83

84
CMH 1
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Assessment
7
ASSESS THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT
Is the child/adolescent in school?
Provide information regarding educational services
and educate carer on importance of keeping the
child/adolescent in school as much as possible.
Is the child/adolescent:
CLINICAL TIP
»
A sk the child/adolescent directly about Being bullied, picked on or made fun of?
these exposures when developmentally Not able to participate and learn?
appropriate and safe to do so. Not wanting/refusing to attend school?
A fter getting consent, liaise with teachers and
other school staff. Go to Management (2.7).
I f there has been an absence from school,
try to help the child/adolescent return to school
as soon as possible and explore reasons for
absence.
Go to CMH 2 (Management)

CMH 2 Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
1 2 3
Developmental Delay/Disorder Problems with Behaviour Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD)
» »
Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1) Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1)
» Provide psychoeducation to person and carers and » Provide guidance on improving behaviour. (2.3) » Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1)
parenting advice. Provide guidance on developmental
disorders. (2.2 and 2.3)
» Assess for and manage stressors, reduce stress and » Provide psychoeducation to person and carers and
strengthen social supports. parenting advice. Provide guidance on improving
»
Provide carer support. (2.6) » behaviour. (2.2 and 2.3)
Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7)
» Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7) » » Assess for and manage stressors, reduce stress and
Link with other available resources in
» strengthen social supports.
Link with other available resources in the community the community.
such as Community-Based Rehabilitation. » » Provide carer support. (2.6)
Offer follow-up.
» Offer Parent Skills Training, when available. (2.8) » Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7)
» Refer children with developmental disorders » Link with other available resources in the community.
to specialist for further assessment, advice on
»
management plan and family planning.
Consider Parent Skills Training when available. (2.8)
»
» Consider behavioural interventions when available. (2.8)
Ensure appropriate follow-up every three months
or more, if needed. » If above treatments have failed AND the child/
» adolescent has a diagnosis of ADHD AND is at least
DO NOT offer pharmacological treatment.
6 years old, refer to a specialist for methylphenidate
treatment.
»
Ensure appropriate follow-up every three months
or more, if needed.
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 85

86
CMH 2
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
4 5 6
Conduct Disorder Problems with Emotions Emotional Disorder or Depression
» » »
Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1) Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1) DO NOT consider pharmacological treatment
» » as first line treatment.
Provide psychoeducation to person and carers and Provide psychoeducation to the person and carers
parenting advice. (2.2) and advice on parenting. (2.2)
»
DO NOT prescribe pharmacological treatment
» » for children younger than 12 years.
Provide guidance on improving behaviour. (2.3) Assess for and manage stressors, reduce stress and
»
strengthen social supports. Provide guidance on child/adolescent well-being. (2.1)
»
Assess for and manage stressors, and strengthen
» »
social supports. Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7) Provide psychoeducation to the person and carers.
» » (2.2 and 2.5)
Provide carer support. (2.6) Link with other available resources in the
»
community. Provide carer support. (2.6)
»
Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7)
»
Liaise with teachers and other school staff. (2.7)
»
Consider Parent Skills Training when available. (2.8)
»
Link with other available resources in the community.
»
Link with other available resources in the community.
»
Assess for and manage stressors, reduce stress and
»
Ensure appropriate follow-up every three months
strengthen social supports.
or more, if needed.
»
Consider Parent Skills Training when available. (2.8)
»
Consider behavioural interventions when available. (2.8)
»
Consider referral for behavioural intervention or
»
D O NOT offer pharmacological treatment.
interpersonal therapy.
»
When psychological interventions prove ineffective,
consult a specialist for Fluoxetine (no other SSRIs or
»
TCAs). Go to DEP for medication details.
»
Ensure appropriate follow-up once a month
or more, if needed.

Guidance for improving behaviour can be provided to all carers
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS who are having difficulty with their child/adolescent’s behaviour
even if a behavioural disorder is not suspected.
2.1 G uidance to promote child/adoles- physical activity each day through daily activities, play, or 2.3 Guidance for improving behaviour
cent well-being and functioning
sports. See www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/
recommendations5_17years ENCOURAGE THE CARER TO:
Participate in school, community, and other social activities Give loving attention, including playing with the child every day.
Can be provided to all children, adolescents as much as possible. Provide opportunities for the adolescents to talk to you.
and carers even if no disorder is suspected.
Spend time with trusted friends and family. Be consistent about what your child/adolescent is allowed
and not allowed to do. Give clear, simple, and short
Avoid the use of drugs, alcohol, and nicotine.
instructions on what the child should and should not do.
ENCOURAGE THE CARER TO:
Spend time with their child in enjoyable activities. Give the child/adolescent simple daily household tasks to do that
2.2 P sychoeducation to person and
Play and communicate with their child/adolescent. match their ability level and praise them immediately after they do
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/ carers and parenting advice the task.
care_child_development/en/
Praise or reward the child/adolescent when you observe good
Listen to the child/adolescent and show understanding Explain the delay or difficulty to the carer and the child/ behaviour and give no reward when behaviour is problematic.
adolescent as appropriate and help them identify strengths
and respect.
Find ways to avoid severe confrontations or foreseeable
and resources.
Protect them from any form of maltreatment, including difficult situations.
Praise the carer and the child/adolescents for their efforts.
bullying and exposure to violence in the home, at school,
Respond only to the most important problem behaviours
and in the community.
and make punishment mild (e.g. witholding rewards and fun
Explain to the carer that parenting a child/adolescent with an
Anticipate major life changes (such as puberty, starting emotional, behavioural or developmental delay or disorder activities) and infrequent compared to the amount of praise.
school, or birth of a sibling) and provide support. can be rewarding but also very challenging.
Put off discussions with the child/adolescent until you are
calm. Avoid using criticism, yelling, and name-calling.
Explain that persons with mental disorders should not be
ENCOURAGE AND HELP THE CHILD / ADOLESCENT TO: blamed for having the disorder. Encourage carers to be kind
DO NOT use threats or physical punishment, and never
and supportive and show love and affection.
Get enough sleep. Promote regular bed routines and physically abuse the child/adolescent. Physical punishment can
remove TV or other electronic devices with screens from the Promote and protect human rights of the person and the family harm the child-carer relationship; it does not work as well as
sleeping area/bedroom. and be vigilant about maintaining human rights and dignity. other methods and can make behaviour problems worse.
Eat regularly. All children/adolescents need three meals Help carers to have realistic expectations and encourage Encourage age-appropriate play (e.g. sports, drawing or
(breakfast, mid-day, and evening) and some snacks each day. them to contact other carers of children/adolescents with other hobbies) for adolescents and offer age-appropriate
support in practical ways (e.g. with homework or other
similar conditions for mutual support.
Be physically active. If they are able, children and
life skillls).
adolescents aged 5–17 should do 60 minutes or more of
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 87

88
CMH 2
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Management
2.4 Psychoeducation for Persons with developmental disorders may often have Make predictable routines in the morning and at bedtime.
developmental delay/disorder associated behavioural problems that are difficult for the carer Promote regular sleep habits. Schedule the day with regular
to manage. See guidance for improving behaviours. (2.3) times for eating, playing, learning, and sleeping.
ENCOURAGE THE CARER TO: Promote and protect the human rights of the person For excessive and unrealistic fears:
and family and be vigilant about maintaining human
Learn what the child’s strengths and weaknesses are and – Praise the child/adolescent or give small rewards when
rights and dignity.
how they learn best, what is stressful to the child and what they try new things or act bravely.
makes him/her happy, and what causes problem behaviours – Educate carers to avoid institutionalization. – Help the child practice facing the difficult situation one
and what prevents them. – Promote access to health information and services. small step at a time (e.g. if the child is afraid of separating
– Promote access to schooling and other forms of education. from the carer, help the child gradually increase the
Learn how the child communicates and responds (using
– Promote access to occupations. amount of time he/she plays alone while the carer is
words, gestures, non-verbal expression, and behaviours).
– Promote participation in family and community life. nearby).
Help the child develop by engaging with her/him in everyday – Acknowledge the child’s feelings and worries and
activities and play. encourage them to confront their fears.
2.5 Psychoeducation for emotional
– Help the child/adolescent create a plan to help them cope
Children learn best during activities that are fun and positive.
problems/disorders including
in case a feared situation occurs.
Involve them in everyday life, starting with simple tasks, one depression in adolescents
at a time. Break complex activities down into simple steps so Explain that emotional disorders are common and can
that the child can learn and be rewarded one step at a time. happen to anybody. The occurrence of emotional disorders
Address any stressful situation in the family environment
does not mean that the person is weak or lazy.
Make predictable daily routines by scheduling regular times such as parental discord or a parent’s mental disorder. With
for eating, playing, learning, and sleeping. the help of teachers explore possible adverse circumstances Emotional disorders can cause unjustified thoughts of
in the school environment.
hopelessness and worthlessness. Explain that these views
Keep their environment stimulating: avoid leaving the child
are likely to improve once the emotional disorders improve.
alone for hours without someone to talk to and limit time Provide opportunities for quality time with the carer and
spent watching TV and playing electronic games. the family. Make the person aware that if they notice thoughts of
self-harm or suicide, they should tell a trusted person and
Keep them in the school setting for as long as possible, Encourage and help the child/adolescent to continue
come back for help immediately.
attending mainstream schools even if only part-time. (or restart) pleasurable and social activities.
Use balanced discipline. When the child/adolescent does Encourage the child/adolescent to practice regular physical
something good, offer a reward. Distract the child/adolescent activity, gradually increasing the duration of sessions.
from things they should not do.
Consider training the child/adolescent and carer in breathing
DO NOT use threats or physical punishments when the exercises, progressive muscle relaxation and other cultural
behaviour is problematic. equivalents.

PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS (CONT.)
2.6 Carer support Ask about any stressful situations that may have an adverse 2.8 Brief psychological treatments
impact on the child’s emotional well-being and learning. If
the child is being bullied, advise the teacher on appropriate This guide does not provide specific protocols to implement
Assess the psychosocial impact of the child/adolescent’s
action to stop it. brief psychological interventions, such as parent skills training,
disorders on the carers, and offer support for their personal,
interpersonal therapy and behavioural therapy. WHO has
social, and mental health needs. Explore strategies to help engage the child in school
developed Parent Skills Training package for caregivers of
activities and facilitate learning, inclusion, and participation.
Promote necessary support and resources for their family children with developmental delay/disorders and is available
life, employment, social activities, and health. Simple tips: on request.
Arrange for respite care (trustworthy carers taking over – Provide opportunities for the child/adolescent to use
care on a short term basis) to give primary carers a break, their skills and strengths.
especially if the child has a developmental disorder. – Ask the student to sit at the front of the class.
Support family to handle social and familial problems and – Give the student extra time to understand and complete
help to problem solve. assignments.
– Divide long assignments into smaller pieces and assign
one piece at a time.
2.7 Liaise with teachers and other
– Provide extra praise for effort and rewards for achievements.
school staff
– DO NOT use threats or physical punishments or
excessive criticism.
After getting consent from the child/adolescent and carer,
– For students with significant difficulties in the classroom,
contact the child/adolescent’s teacher and provide advice/
recruit a volunteer to come to class to provide one-on-one
make a plan on how to support the child with learning and
attention or pair the student with a peer who can provide
participation in school activities.
support or help with learning.
Explain that the child/adolescent’s mental disorder is
– If the child/adolescent has been out of school, help them
affecting their learning/behaviour/social functioning and that
return as soon as possible by creating a gradually increasing
there are things the teacher can do to help.
reintegration schedule. During the reintegration period, the
student should be excused from quizzes and exams.
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 89

90
CMH 3
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Follow-up
CMH 3 Follow-up
1
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT
CLINICAL TIP
»
Is the person improving? If exposure to one or more types
Reassess and monitor the child/adolescent’s symptoms, of maltreatment was identified
behaviour, and functioning at every visit. in the assessment, assess ongoing
exposure and risks to the child/
adolescent.
»
Continue with management plan and follow-up
until symptoms cease or remit.
»
Provide additional psychoeducation and advice on
»
parenting. P rovide additional psychoeducation and advice on parenting, as appropriate.
» »
If on medication, consider gradually reducing R eview psychosocial interventions and revise management plan as needed.
medication dose in consultation with a specialist. Involve child/adolescent and carers in decision-making, as appropriate.
»
»
If not on medication, decrease frequency of
Offer regular follow-up.
follow up once symptoms have subsided and the
child/adolescent is able to perform well in daily life.
If NO improvement in symptoms and/or functioning in 6 months:
»
Provide additional interventions if available.
»
Increase the frequency of follow-up visits as needed.
»
REFER TO SPECIALIST if available, for further assessment and management.

DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS EMOTIONAL DISORDERS
If no improvement, further deterioration, predicted danger to the If no improvement and the child/adolescent has received
child, or physical health is affected (such as nutritional problems), psychosocial treatment for at least 6 months
» »
REFER TO SPECIALIST for further assessment and advice on R EFER TO SPECIALIST.
management plan.
DO NOT initiate pharmacological treatment.
DO NOT consider pharmacological treatment.
DEPRESSION
ADHD
If no improvement and the adolescent is 12 years or older and
If no improvement and the child is at least 6 years old and has has received psychosocial treatment for at least 6 months
received psychosocial treatment for at least 6 months »
R efer to or consult SPECIALIST for fluoxetine (but not other
»
Refer to or consult SPECIALIST for methylphenidate use. SSRIs or TCAs).
CLINICAL TIP
CONDUCT DISORDERS
»
For adolescents, plan to see If no improvemen or predicted danger to the adolescent
»
the adolescent separately from their REFER TO SPECIALIST for further assessment and advice
on management plan.
parent/carer for part of the follow-up
DO NOT consider pharmacological treatment.
visit. Clarify the confidential nature of
the health care discussion, including in
what circumstances parents or other
2
adults will be given information.
CONDUCT ROUTINE ASSESSMENTS
At every visit:
» »
For children under 5 years, monitor child development. Assess opportunities for the child/adolescent to participate
» in family and social life.
Assess for the presence of any new problem or symptom related
»
to mood, behaviour or development/learning. For adolescents, Assess carers’ needs and support available to the family.
»
assess for the presence of worsening mood (irritable, easily Monitor attendance at school.
annoyed or frustrated, down or sad) or suicidal thoughts. »
Review management plan and monitor adherence to
Go back to Assessment Step 4 for worsening mood. Go to » SUI
psychosocial interventions.
for suicidal thoughts.
»
If on medication, review adherence, side-effects, and dosing.
»
Explore and address psychosocial stressors in the home, school
or work environment, including exposure to violence or other
forms of maltreatment.
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS 91

92
CMH 3
CHILD & ADOLESCENT MENTAL & BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS Follow-up
3
MONITOR PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT AS APPLICABLE
Additional monitoring if the adolescent Additional monitoring if the child has
has been prescribed fluoxetine been prescribed methylphenidate
Record prescription and administration details. Record prescription and administration details.
Weekly for the first month, then every month: Monitor potential for misuse and diversion.
monitor for reported side-effects and changes in mood and
Every three months: monitor/record height, weight, blood
other symptoms.
pressure, reported side-effects, and changes in behaviour.
Consult specialist if you identify severe medication side-
Consult specialist if you observe medication side-effects
effects or adverse events (e.g. new or worsening suicidal
(e.g. failure to make expected gains in weight and height,
thoughts, suicidal or self-harming behaviour, agitation,
increased blood pressure, agitation, anxiety, and severe
irritability, anxiety or insomnia).
insomnia).
Advise the adolescent to continue the medication even if
After one year of treatment: Consult specialist regarding
they feel better. The medication should be continued for
the continuation of methylphenidate.
9-12 months after the symptoms have resolved to reduce
the risk of relapse.
Advise against suddenly stopping the medication.
If symptoms have been resolved for 9-12 months:
Discuss with adolescent and carer risks and benefits to taper
off medication. Reduce treatment gradually over minimum 4
weeks, monitor closely for symptom recurrence.

DEMENTIA
Dementia is a chronic and progressive syndrome due to changes in emotional control, social behaviour, or motivation. People with
in the brain. Although it can occur at any age, it is more common dementia may be totally unaware of these changes and may not
in older people. Dementia is a significant cause of disability and seek help. Family members may notice memory problems, changes
dependency among older people worldwide; it has a physical, in personality or behaviour, confusion, wandering, or incontinence.
psychological, social, and economic impact on carers, families, However some people with dementia and their carers may deny
and society at large. or minimize the severity of memory loss and associated problems.
Dementia results in decline in cognitive functioning and usually
The conditions that cause dementia produce changes in a person’s interferes with activities of daily living, such as washing, dressing,
mental ability, personality, and behaviour. People with dementia eating, personal hygiene, and toilet activities. Although there is no
commonly experience problems with memory and the skills needed cure, with early recognition and supportive treatment, the lives of
to carry out everyday activities. Dementia is not part of normal people with dementia and their caregivers can be significantly
ageing. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause, however, improved, and the physical health, cognition, activity, and well-
dementia can be caused by a variety of diseases and injuries to the being of the person with dementia can be optimized.
brain. People with dementia often present with forgetfulness or
feeling depressed. Other common symptoms include deterioration
93

94
DEM
DEMENTIA
DEM Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
A ssess for signs of dementia Management Protocols
1. Dementia – without behavioural/psychological symptoms
Are there any other explanations for
2. Dementia – with behavioural/psychological symptoms
the symptoms?
Psychosocial Interventions
– Rule out delirium
– Rule out depression (pseudodementia)
Pharmacological Interventions
Evaluate for other medical issues
Assess for behavioral or psychological
symptoms
Rule out other MNS conditions
FOLLOW-UP
Evaluate the needs of carers

CLINICAL TIP:
DEM 1 Assessment
Interview the key informant
(someone who knows the person
well) and ask about recent changes
in thinking and reasoning, memory
and orientation. Occasional
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF DEMENTIA
memory lapses are common in
older people, whereas some
Decline or problems with memory (severe forgetfulness) and orientation
problems can be significant even
(awareness of time, place, and person)
if infrequent.
Mood or behavioural problems such as apathy (appearing uninterested) or irritability
Ask, for example, whether the
Loss of emotional control-easily upset, irritable, or tearful
person often forgets where they
Difficulties in carrying out usual work, domestic, or social activities put things. Do they sometimes
CLINICAL TIP
forget what happened the day
Assess directly by testing before? Does the person sometimes
1
memory, orientation, and forget where they are?
language skills with a general
Ask the informant when these
neurologic assessment, utilizing Assess for signs of dementia
problems started and whether they
culturally adapted tools if
have been getting worse over time.
available. See Essential Care &
Practice (» ECP).
Are there problems with memory and/or orientation?
(e.g. forgetting what happened the previous day or not knowing where he or she is)
DEMENTIA is unlikely.
Screen for other MNS conditions.
Does the person have difficulties in performing key roles/activities?
(e.g. with daily activities such as shopping, paying bills, cooking, etc.)
DEMENTIA is unlikely.
Screen for other MNS conditions.
DDEEMMEENNTTIIAA 95

96
DEM 1
DEMENTIA Assessment
2
CLINICAL TIP Are there any other explanations for the symptoms?
Delirium: transient fluctuating mental
state characterized by disturbed attention
that develops over a short period of time Have the symptoms been present and slowly
and tends to fluctuate during the course progressing for at least 6 months?
of a day. It may result from acute organic
causes such as infections, medication,
metabolic abnormalities, substance
Ask for ANY of the following:
intoxication, or substance withdrawal.
– Abrupt onset
– Short duration (days to weeks)
– Disturbance at night and associated
with impairment of consciousness
– Disorientation of time and place
CLINICAL TIP
Does the person have moderate
Cognitive impairment may be the result
to severe DEPRESSION? Go to DEP.
of depression – “Pseudodementia”
Suspect DELIRIUM
Manage depression. Go to DEP.
Once treated for depression, review criteria
for dementia. Go to STEP 1 Evaluate for possible medical causes (toxic/metabolic/infectious).
– Obtain urinalysis to evaluate for infection
Suspect – Review medications, particularly those with significant anti-
DEMENTIA cholinergic side effects (such as antidepressants, many antihistamines,
and antipsychotics)
– Evaluate for pain
– Evaluate nutritional status, consider vitamin deficiency
or electrolyte abnormality

3
Evaluate for other medical issues
Does the person have ANY of the following?
Less than 60 years old prior to symptom onset Clinical history of goitre, slow pulse, dry skin (hypothyroidism)
Onset of symptoms associated with head injury, stroke, History of sexually transmitted infection (STI),
or altered or loss of consciousness including HIV/AIDS
Unusual Features.
»
Refer to specialist.
Does the person have poor dietary
intake, malnutrition, or anaemia?
Fortification of food and monitoring of
weight is necessary.
Does the person have cardiovascular risk factors?
– Hypertension – Obesity
– High cholesterol – Heart disease (chest pain, heart attack)
– Diabetes – Previous stroke or transient ischaemic
– Smoking attack (TIA)
Refer to appropriate SPECIALIST.
Reduce cardiovascular risk factors:
– Advise person to stop smoking – Advise weight-reducing diet for obesity
– Treat hypertension – Treat diabetes
DEMENTIA 97

98
DEM 1
DEMENTIA Assessment
CLINICAL TIP
4
Determine:
– Who are the main carers?
Evaluate the needs of the carers. – Who else provides care and
what care do they provide?
– What is difficult to manage?
Is the carer having difficulty coping or experiencing strain?
E xplore psychosocial interventions about
respite care, activation of community support network,
and family/individual therapy, if available.
Is the carer experiencing depressed mood?
For assessment of depression in care, go to » DEP.
Try to address strain with support and psychoeducation.
Problem-solving counselling or cognitive behavioural therapy.
Is the carer facing loss of income and/or additional
expenses because of the needs for care?
E xplore local financial support options,
such as disability services.

5
Does the person have ANY of the following
BEHAVIOURAL or PSYCHOLOGICAL symptoms of dementia?
Behavioural symptoms, e.g. Psychological symptoms, e.g.
Wandering Hallucinations
Night-time disturbance Delusions
Agitation Anxiety
Aggression Uncontrollable emotional outbursts
Go to PROTOCOL 1
Go to PROTOCOL 2
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK OF SUICIDE,
ASSESS AND MANAGE before continuing
»
to Protocol. Go to SUI.
IF THE PERSON HAS OTHER CONCURRENT
MNS CONDITIONS, ASSESS AND MANAGE
before continuing to Protocol
DEMENTIA 99

100
DEM 2
DEMENTIA Management
DEM 2 Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
1 2
DEMENTIA – without behavioural DEMENTIA – with behavioural
and/or psychological symptoms and/or psychological symptoms
Provide Psychoeducation to person and carers. (2.1) Follow PROTOCOL 1
Encourage carers to conduct interventions to improve
+
cognitive functioning. (2.4)
Promote independence, functioning, and mobility. (2.3)
Manage behavioral and psychological symptoms. (2.2)
Provide carers with support. (2.5)
Consider medications only in settings where specific
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease can be made AND where
adequate support and supervision by specialists and If there is imminent risk to the person or carer:
monitoring (for side-effects) from carers is available. (2.6)
Consider antipsychotic medications if symptoms persist
or if there is imminent risk of harm. (2.7)
Refer to speacialist when available.

PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.1 Psychoeducation Consider environmental adaptations such as appropriate – Recommend making adaptations in the person’s home. It can
seating, safe wandering areas, signs (e.g. ‘no exit’ sign on be helpful to add hand-rails or ramps. Signs for key locations
Ask people assessed with dementia whether they wish the street door or signpost to toilet). (e.g. toilet, bathroom, bedroom) can help ensure that the
person does not get lost or lose orientation while home.
to know the diagnosis and with whom it should be
Encourage soothing, calming, or distracting strategies.
shared.
Suggest an activity the person enjoys (e.g. going for a – Recommend physical activity and exercise to maintain
– Tailor the explanation of the illness so that they walk, listening to music, engaging in conversation), mobility and reduce risk of falls.
can understand and retain the information. especially when feeling agitated.
– Advise recreational activities (tailored to stage and severity
of dementia).
– Give basic information. (Do not overload them with
too much!) 2.3 Promote functioning in – Manage sensory deficits (such as low vision or poor
Key Messages: activities of daily living (ADLs) hearing) with appropriate devices (e.g. magnifying glass,
hearing aids).
and community life
– Dementia is an illness of the brain and tends to get
– Refer for occupational therapy, if available.
worse over time.
For interventions that promote functioning in ADLs and
– Although there is no cure, there is much that can be
»
community life, go to ECP.
done to help and support the person and the family. 2.4 Interventions to improve
Plan for ADL in a way that maximises independent cognitive functioning
– Many specific concerns and behaviors can be
activity, enhances function, helps to adapt and develop
managed as they arise. A lot can be done to make the
skills, and minimises the need for support. Facilitate
person more comfortable and to make providing Encourage carers to:
functioning and participation in the community involving
support less stressful for the carer.
people and their carers in planning and implementation Provide regular orientation information (e.g. day, date, time,
of these interventions. Assist in liaison with available names of people) so that the person can remain oriented.
2.2 M anage behavioral and social resources.
Use materials such as newspapers, radio, or TV programmes,
psychological symptoms – Give advice to maintain independent toileting skills, inclu- family albums and household items to promote communication,
ding prompting and regulation of fluid intake. (If incon- to orient them to current events, to stimulate memories, and
tinence occurs, all possible causes should be evaluated and to enable people to share and value their experiences.
Identify and treat underlying physical health problems that
treatments trialed before concluding it is permanent).
may affect behaviour. Look for pain, infections, etc. on Use simple short sentences to make verbal communication clear.
physical exam (Go to
»
ECP). Refer to specialist if needed. – Keep the environment at home safe to reduce the risk of Try to minimize competing noises, such as radio, TV, or other
falling and injury. conversation. Listen carefully to what the person has to say.
Identify events (e.g. shopping at busy market) or factors
(e.g. going out alone) that may precede, trigger, or enhance – Inform family members that it is important to keep the Keep things simple, avoid changes to routine, and, as far
problem behaviours. Modify these triggers if possible. floor of the person’s home without clutter to reduce as possible, avoid exposing the person to unfamiliar and
the risk of falling. bewildering places.
DEMENTIA 101

102
DEM 2
DEMENTIA Management
PSYCHOSOCIAL (CONT.) PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
2.5 Carer support 2.6 For Dementia without 2.7 Antipsychotic medication for
behavioural and/or behavioural and/or psychological
Assess the impact on the carer and the carer’s needs to
psychological symptoms symptoms
ensure necessary support and resources for their family life,
»
employment, social activities, and health (see DEM 1).
Acknowledge that it can be extremely frustrating and Do not consider cholinesterase inhibitors (like P rovide psychosocial interventions first.
stressful to take care of people with dementia. Carers donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine) or memantine
I f there is imminent risk to person or carers, consider
need to be encouraged to respect the dignity of the routinely for all cases of dementia.
»
antipsychotic medication. Go to PSY 2, Management
person with dementia and avoid hostility towards,
C onsider medications only in settings where specific for details about antipsychotic medication.
or neglect of, the person.
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease can be made AND where
F ollow the principles of:
Encourage the carers to seek help if they are experiencing adequate support and supervision by specialists and
difficulty or strain in caring for their loved one. monitoring (for side-effects and response) from carers is – “Start low, go slow” (titrate) and review the need regularly
available. (at least monthly).
Provide information to the carer regarding dementia,
– Use the lowest effective dose.
keeping in mind the wishes of the person with dementia. If appropriate:
– Monitor the person for extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS)
Provide training and support in specific skills, e.g. F or dementia with suspected Alzhemer’s Disease,
Avoid i.v. haloperidol
managing difficult behaviour, if necessary. To be most and with CLOSE MONITORING, consider cholinesterase
effective, elicit active participation, e.g. role play. inhibitors (e.g. donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine) Avoid diazepam.
OR memantine.
Consider providing practical support when feasible,
e.g. home-based respite care. Another family or suitable F or dementia with associated vascular disease, consider
person can supervise and care for the person with memantine.
dementia to provide the main carer with a period of relief
to rest or carry out other activities.
Explore whether the person qualifies for any disability
benefits or other social/financial support (government or
non-governmental).

DEM 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
1 »
Follow-up at minimum every
3 months.
»
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT If on medications, recommend
follow-up monthly.
Is the person stable (no worsening symptoms or decline
in function; behavioural/psychological symptoms are
improving if present)?
Continue management plan. If not on medications
Initiate pharmacological intervention, if appropriate.
Follow up at minimum every
3 months. If on medications
Review adherence, side effects and dosing. Adjust or
consider alternative medication as appropriate.
Review psychosocial interventions.
Evaluate for medical problems.
DEMENTIA 103

104
DEM 3
DEMENTIA Follow-up
2
CONDUCT ROUTINE ASSESSMENTS
At each visit, routinely assess and address the following:
Medication side-effects Safety risks and offer appropriate behaviour modification
If on antipsychotics, check for extrapyramidal symptoms if disease has progressed (e.g. limit driving, cooking, etc.)
»
(Go to PSY). Stop or reduce dose if present.
New behavioural or psychological symptoms
Medical and MNS co-morbidities »
Symptoms of depression (Go to DEP)
»
Ability to participate in activities of daily living and or imminent risk of self-harm/suicide (Go to SUI).
any needs of care
Needs of the carers
3
PROVIDE PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
»
Continue to promote functioning and provide psychosocial education.
» »
See DEM 2.1-2.5 and ECP for details.

DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
Disorders due to substance use include both drug and alcohol HARMFUL USE is a pattern of psychoactive substance use
use disorders and certain conditions including acute intoxication, that damages health. This damage may be physical, e.g. liver
overdose and withdrawal. disease, or mental, e.g. episodes of depressive disorder. It is
often associated with social consequences, e.g. family or
ACUTE INTOXICATION is a transient condition following intake of work problems.
a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances of consciousness,
cognition, perception, affect, or behaviour. DEPENDENCE is a cluster of physiological, behavioural, and
cognitive phenomena in which the use of a psychoactive substance
OVERDOSE is the use of any drug in such an amount that acute takes on a much higher priority for a given individual than other
adverse physical or mental effects are produced. behaviours that once had greater value. It is characterized by a
strong craving to use the substance and a loss of control over its
WITHDRAWAL is the experience of a set of unpleasant symptoms use. It is often associated with high levels of substance use and
following the abrupt cessation or reduction in dose of a psychoactive the presence of a withdrawal state upon cessation.
substance; it has been consumed in high enough doses and for a
long enough duration for the person to be physically or mentally
dependent on it. Withdrawal symptoms are, essentially, opposite to
those that are produced by the psychoactive substance itself.
105

106
SUB
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
SUB Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
E MERGENCY ASSESSMENT: Management Protocols
Is intoxication or withdrawal suspected?
1. Harmful use
2. Dependence
– Does the person appear sedated?
3. Alcohol withdrawal
– Does the person appear overstimulated, anxious, or agitated?
4. Opioid withdrawal
– Does the person appear confused?
5. Opioid agonist maintenance treatment
6. Benzodiazepine withdrawal
Does the person use psychoactive substances?
Psychosocial Interventions
Is there harmful use?
Pharmacological Interventions
Does the person have substance
dependence?
FOLLOW-UP

SUB EMERGENCY
If no emergency presentation present, go to SUB 1, Assessment.
EMERGENCY PRESENTATIONS OF DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
Alcohol intoxication: Smell of alcohol on the Stimulant intoxication: Dilated pupils, excited, racing
breath, slurred speech, uninhibited behaviour; thoughts, disordered thinking, strange behaviour, recent
disturbance in the level of consciousness, cognition, use of psychoactive substances, raised pulse and blood
perception, affect, or behaviour pressure, aggressive, erratic, or violent behaviour
Opioid overdose: Unresponsive or minimally Delirium associated with substance use:
responsive, slow respiratory rate, pinpoint pupils Confusion, hallucination, racing thoughts, anxiety,
agitation, disorientation, typically in association
Alcohol or other sedative withdrawal: Tremor in
with either stimulant intoxication or alcohol (or other
hands, sweating, vomiting, increased pulse and blood
sedative) withdrawal
pressure, agitation, headache, nausea, anxiety;
seizure and confusion in severe cases
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 107

108
SUB
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
CLINICAL TIP
1
»
Suspect sedative intoxication/
overdose in anyone with
Does the person appear sedated?
unexplained drowsiness and
slow breathing.
SSSKKKIIIPPP tttooo SSSTTTEEEPPP 11111200000
Suspect SEDATIVE INTOXICATION
(alcohol, opioids, other sedatives)
Check Airway, Breathing, Circulation (ABC).
Provide initial respiratory support.
Give oxygen.
Is the person minimally responsive, unresponsive,
or in respiratory failure?
Supportive care.
Monitor vital signs.
Lay the person on their side to prevent aspiration.
Give oxygen if available.
Consider intravenous (i.v.), rehydration but do not give
fluids orally while sedated.
Observe the person until fully recovered or
transported to hospital.

Check pupils.
Normal pupils Pinpoint pupils
Suspect
Opioid overdose less likely –
OPIOID OVERDOSE
consider overdose of alcohol,
other sedatives, or other medical
causes (i.e. head injury, infection,
or hypoglycemia).
Give i.v., intramuscular (i.m.), intranasal
or subcutaneous naloxone 0.4-2 mg.
Continue respiratory support.
Did the person respond to naloxone within 2 minutes?
GIVE A SECOND DOSE Observe for 1-2 hours and repeat naloxone
as needed.
Observe the person until fully recovered
or transported to hospital. Continue to resuscitate and observe the person
until fully recovered or transported to hospital.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 109

110
SUB
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
2
Does the person appear
overstimulated, anxious, or agitated?
SSSKKKIIIPPP tttooo SSSTTTEEEPPP 11111300000
ASSESS AND MANAGE A – D
A Person has recently stopped MANAGE WITHDRAWAL
Suspect
drinking or using sedatives and is – If the person has tremors, sweating, or vital sign changes then give
ALCOHOL or
now showing any of the following diazepam 10-20 mg orally (p.o.) and transfer to hospital or detoxification
BENZODIAZEPINE
signs: Tremors, sweating, vomiting, facility if possible.
WITHDRAWAL
increased blood pressure (BP) & heart
– Observe and repeat doses as needed for continued signs of
rate, and agitation.
withdrawal (tremors, sweating, increased BP and heart rate).
– For alcohol withdrawal only: Give thiamine 100 mg daily for five days.
TRANSFER IMMEDIATELY TO A HOSPITAL
if the following are present:
– Other serious medical problems, e.g. hepatic encephalopathy,
gastrointestinal bleeding, or head injury.
– Seizures: give diazepam 10-20 mg p.o., i.v. or rectum (p.r.) first.
– Delirium: give diazepam 10-20 mg p.o., i.v. or p.r. first. If severe and not
responsive to diazepam, give an anti-psychotic medication such as
haloperidol 1-2.5 mg p.o. or i.m. Continue to treat other signs of withdrawal
(tremors, sweating, vital signs changes) with diazepam p.o., i.v. or p.r.

B Person has recently used Suspect Give diazepam 5-10 mg p.o., i.v., or p.r.
stimulants (cocaine, amphetamine ACUTE STIMULANT in titrated doses until the person is calm and lightly sedated.
type stimulants) and is showing INTOXICATION If psychotic symptoms are not responsive to diazepam, consider
any of the following signs: dilated antipsychotic medication such as haloperidol 1-2.5 mg p.o. or i.m..
pupils, anxiety, agitation, hyper- Treat until symptoms resolve. If symptoms persist, go to PSY.
excitable state, racing thoughts,
For management of persons with aggressive and/or agitated behaviour
raised pulse and blood pressure.
go to PSY, Table 5.
If the person has chest pain, tachyarrythmias, or other
neurological signs TRANSFER TO HOSPITAL.
During the post-intoxication phase, be alert for suicidal thoughts
or actions. If suicidal thoughts are present, go to SUI.
C Person has recently stopped using Suspect MANAGE OPIOID WITHDRAWAL
opioids and is showing any of the ACUTE OPIOID – Methadone 20 mg, with a supplemental dose of 5-10 mg 4 hours
following signs: dilated pupils, WITHDRAWAL later if necessary.
muscle aches, abdominal cramps,
– Buprenorphine 4-8 mg, with a supplementary dose 12 hours later if
headache, nausea, vomiting,
necessary.
diarrhea, runny eyes and nose,
– If methadone or buprenorphine are not available, any opioid can
anxiety, restlessness.
be used in the acute setting, i.e. morphine sulphate 10-20 mg as an
initial dose with a 10 mg extra dose if needed. Also consider an alpha
adrenergic agonists, i.e. clonidine or lofexidine.
Once stable, go to SUB 2
D
RULE OUT OTHER MEDICAL CAUSES
AND PRIORITY MNS CONDITIONS.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 111

112
SUB
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
3
Does the person appear confused?
SSSKKKIIIPPP tttooo SSSTTUEEBPP 1 1111 A0000ssessment
Are there any medical conditions which might
explain the confusion, including:
– head trauma – hepatic encephalopathy
– hypoglycaemia – cerebrovascular accidents (CVA)
– pneumonia or other infections
Manage the physical condition
ASSESS AND MANAGE A – C and refer the person to hospital.
A Person has stopped drinking in the Suspect If the person is showing other signs of alcohol
last week: confusion, hallucination, withdrawal (tremors, sweating, vital signs changes)
ALCOHOL OR
racing thoughts, anxiety, agitation, – Treat with diazepam 10-20 mg p.o.
BENZODIAZEPINE
disorientation, typically in association
WITHDRAWAL – TRANSFER TO HOSPITAL.
with either stimulant intoxication or
DELIRIUM Manage delirium with antipsychotics such as
alcohol (or other sedative) withdrawal.
haloperidol 1-2.5 mg p.o. or i.m.

B Person has been drinking heavily Suspect Treat with thiamine 100-500 mg 2-3 times daily i.v. or i.m. for 3-5 days.
in the last few days AND has any WERNICKE’S TRANSFER TO HOSPITAL.
of the folllowing signs:
ENCEPHALOPATHY
– nystagmus (involuntary, rapid and
repetitive movement of the eyes)
– ophthalmoplegia
(weakness/paralysis of one or more
of the muscles that control eye
movement)
– ataxia (uncoordinated movements).
C Person has used stimulants in the Suspect Treat with diazepam 5-10 mg p.o., i.v. or p.r. until the patient is
last few days: Dilated pupils, excited, STIMULANT lightly sedated.
racing thoughts, disordered thinking,
INTOXICATION If psychotic symptoms do not respond to diazepam, consider
strange behaviour, recent use of
an antipsychotic such as haloperidol 1-2.5 mg p.o. or i.m.
psychoactive substances, raised pulse
If psychotic symptoms persist, go to PSY
and blood pressure, aggressive,
erratic, or violent behaviour.
CLINICAL TIP
»
Following the management of emergency
presentation, GO to SUB 1 assessment
and SUB 2 management protocols 1 to 6
as appropriate.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 113

114
SUB 1
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Assessment
SUB 1 Assessment
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE
Appearing affected by alcohol or other substance (e.g. smell I ncidental findings: macrocytic anaemia, low platelet count,
of alcohol, slurred speech, sedated, erratic behaviour) elevated mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
Signs of recent drug use (recent injection marks, skin infection) E mergency presentation due to substance withdrawal
overdose, or intoxication. Person may appear sedated,
Signs and symptoms of acute behavioural effects, withdrawal
overstimulated, agitated, anxious or confused
features or effects of prolonged use (see Box 1)
P ersons with disorders due to substance use may not
Deterioration of social functioning (i.e. difficulties at work
report any problems with substance use. Look for:
or home, unkempt appearance)
– Recurrent requests for psychoactive medications including
Signs of chronic liver disease (abnormal liver enzymes),
analgesics
jaundiced (yellow) skin and eyes, palpable and tender liver
edge (in early liver disease), ascites (distended abdomen is filled – Injuries
with fluid), spider naevi (spider-like blood vessels visible on
– Infections associated with intravenous drug use (HIV/AIDS,
the surface of the skin), and altered mental status (hepatic
Hepatitis C)
encephalopathy)
Problems with balance, walking, coordinated movements,
and nystagmus
CLINICAL TIP
»
Avoid stereotyping! All persons presenting to
health care facilities should be asked about
their tobacco and alcohol use.

BOX 1: PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES: ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL EFFECTS, WITHDRAWAL FEATURES, AND EFFECTS OF PROLONGED USE
ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL EFFECTS WITHDRAWAL FEATURES EFFECTS OF PROLONGED USE
Alcohol Smell of alcohol on breath, slurred speech, disinhibited Tremors, shaking, nausea/vomiting, increased heart rate Loss of brain volume, reduction in cognitive capacity,
behavior, agitation, vomiting, unsteady gait and blood pressure, seizures, agitation, confusion, impaired judgement, loss of balance, liver fibrosis,
hallucinations gastritis, anaemia, increased risk of some cancers and a
Can be life-threatening range of other medical problems
Benzodiazepines Slurred speech, disinhibited behavior, unsteady gait Anxiety, insomnia, tremors, shaking, nausea/vomiting, Memory impariment, increased risk of falls in the elderly,
increased heart rate and blood pressure, seizures, risk of fatal sedative overdose
agitation, confusion, hallucinations
Can be life-threatening
Opioids Pinpoint pupils, drowsiness and falling asleep, decreased Dilated pupils, anxiety, nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, Constipation, risk of fatal sedative overdose, hypogonadism,
awareness, slow speech abdominal cramps, muscle aches and pains, headaches, adaptations in reward, learning and stress responses
runny eyes and nose, yawning, hair standing up on
arms, increased heart rate and blood pressure
Tobacco Arousal, increased attention, concentration and memory; Irritibility, hostility, anxiety, dysphoria, depresed mood, Lung disease (in tobacco smokers), cardiovascular disease,
decreased anxiety and appetite; stimulant-like effects increased heart rate, increased appetite risk of cancers and other health effects
Cocaine, Methamphetamines & Dilated pupils, increased blood pressure and heart rate, Fatigue, increased appetite, depressed, irritable mood Hypertension, increased risk of cerebrovascular accidents
Amphetamine-type stimulants excited, euphoric, hyperactivity, rapid speech, racing Watch out for suicidal thoughts (CVAs), arrythmias, heart disease, anxiety, depression
thoughts, disordered thinking, paranoia, aggressive,
erratic, violent
Khat Alertness, euphoria, and mild excitation Lethargy, depressed mode, irritability Khat users often spend a significant portion of the
day chewing khat; consti-pation, risk of mental health
problems such as psychosis
Cannabis Normal pupils, red conjunctivae, delayed Depressed or labile mood, anxiety, irritability, sleep Increased risk of mental health problems including
responsiveness, euphoria, relaxation disturbance (there may not be any clearly observable anxiety, paranoia and psychosis, lack of motivation,
features) difficulty in concentration, increased risk of vasospasm
leading to myocardial infarction and stroke
Tramadol Opioid effects (sedation, euphoria, etc.) followed by Predominantly opioid withdrawal effects but also some Opioid dependence, risk of seizures, disturbed sleep
stimulant effects (excitation and in high doses seizures serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI)
withdrawal symptoms (depressed mood, lethargy)
Volatile solvents Dizziness, disorientation, euphoria, light-headedness, Increased susceptibility to seizures Decreased cognitive function and dementia, peripheral
increased mood, hallucinations, delusions, incoord- neuropathy, other neurological sequelae, increased risk of
ination, visual disturbances, anxiolysis, sedation arrythmias causing sudden death
Hallucinogens Increased heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, No evidence Acute or chronic psychotic episodes, flashbacks or re-
decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, motor experiencing of drug effects long after termination of use
incoordination, papillary dilatation, hallucinations
MDMA Increased self-confidence, empathy, understanding, Nausea, muscle stiffness, headache, loss of appetite, Neurotoxic, leads to behavioral and physiological
sensation of intimacy, communication, euphoria, energy blurred vision, dry mouth, insomnia, depression, anxiety, consequences, depression
fatigue, difficulty concentrating
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 115

116 SUB 1
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Assessment
1
CLINICAL TIP
Does the person use substances?
While taking a history, ask:
How the person started using
substances?
Ask about use of tobacco, alcohol, and psychoactive prescription
When they started using them?
medicines. Depending on the setting and the presentation, consider What was happening in their
asking about cannabis and other substance use. life at that time?
If anyone in their family or
social circle use substances?
If they have tried to reduce their
use? Why? What happened?
Emphasise the health benefits of not
using psychoactive substances.
EXIT MODULE
2
Is the substance use harmful?
For each substance used assess:
A Frequency and quantity of use. (Hint: Ask “How many days per week do you use this substance? How much do you use per day?”)
B Harmful behaviours. (Hint: Ask “Does your substance use cause you any problems?”)
– Injuries and accidents – Sexual activity while intoxicated that was risky – Violence towards others
– Driving while intoxicated or later regretted – Poor performance in education, employment roles
– Drug injection, sharing needles, reusing needles – Legal or financial problems – Poor performance in expected social roles
– Relationship problems as a result of use – Inability to care for children responsibly (e.g. parenting)
Remember answers for use
later during assessment.

3
Is DEPENDENCE likely?
For each substance used ask about the following features of dependence:
– High levels of frequent substance use – Difficulty self regulating the use of that substance
– A strong craving or sense of compulsion to despite the risks and harmful consequences
use the substance – Increasing levels of use tolerance and withdrawal
symptoms on cessation
CLINICAL TIP
Proceed to PROTOCOL 2
Patterns of substance use that suggest dependence include:
TOBACCO: several times a day, often starting in the morning.
ALCOHOL: more than 6 standard drinks at a time, and daily use. IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK OF
PRESCRIPTION PILLS: taking a higher dose of medication than SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
prescribed and lying to get prescriptions. before continuing to Protocol
CANNABIS: at least 1 g of cannabis daily. (Go to SUI)
Is the substance use harmful?
See answer in step 2, above.
Provide psychoeducation about the risks Proceed to PROTOCOL 1
of different levels of each substance used.
EXIT MODULE
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK OF
SUICIDE, ASSESS AND MANAGE
before continuing to Protocol
(Go to SUI)
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 117

118
SUB 2
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Management
SUB 2 Management
PROTOCOL
1
Harmful Use
»
Provide psychoeducation and emphasize that the level/pattern of substance use is causing harm to health.
»
Explore the person’s motivations for substance use. Conduct motivational interviewing.
(See BRIEF PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTION – MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING (2.2)).
»
Advise stopping the substance completely or consuming it at a non-harmful level, if one exists.
Verbalise your intention to support the person to do this. Ask them if they are ready to make this change.
»
Explore STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING OR STOPPING USE (2.3) and
STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING HARM (2.5).
»
Address food, housing, and employment needs.
»
Follow up
»
If the person is an adolescent or a woman of child-bearing age, pregnant, or breastfeeding,
see SPECIAL POPULATIONS.

PROTOCOL
2
Dependence
IF THE PERSON IS DEPENDENT ON OPIOIDS: FOR ALL OTHER SUBSTANCES:
» »
Maintenance treatment is generally more effective than detoxification. Advise stopping the substance completely and verbalise your intention to support
» the person in doing so. Ask them if they are ready to do this.
Assess the severity of dependence and, if appropriate, provide or refer the person for
»
opioid agonist maintenance treatment, also known as opioid substitution therapy (OST), Explore STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING OR STOPPING USE and STRATEGIES FOR
after detoxification. Go to PROTOCOL 5 (Opioid Agonist Maintenance Treatment). REDUCING HARM.
» »
In the remainder of cases arrange planned detoxification, if necessary. Consider referral to peer help groups or rehabilitation/residential therapeutic
Go to PROTOCOL 4 (Opioid Withdrawal). communities, if available.
»
Address food, housing, and employment needs.
IF THE PERSON IS DEPENDENT ON BENZODIAZEPINES: »
Assess and treat any physical or mental health co-morbidity, ideally after 2-3 weeks of
»
Sudden cessation can lead to seizures and delirium. Consider gradually reducing the abstinence, as some problems will resolve with abstinence.
dose of benzodiazepine with supervised dispensing or a more rapid reduction in an
inpatient setting. Go to PROTOCOL 6 (Benzodiazepine Withdrawal).
IN ALL CASES:
»
Provide psychoeducation.
IF THE PERSON IS DEPENDENT ON ALCOHOL:
»
» Arrange for detoxification services if necessary or treatment in an inpatient facility where
Sudden alcohol cessation can lead to seizures and delirium; however, if the person is
available. Treat withdrawal symptoms as needed.
willing to stop using alcohol, facilitate this. Determine the appropriate setting to cease
»
alcohol use, and arrange inpatient detoxification, if necessary. Go to PROTOCOL 3 Provide a brief intervention using motivational interviewing to encourage the person to
(Alcohol Withdrawal). engage in treatment of their substance dependence.
» »
Advise consumption of thiamine at a dose of 100 mg/day p.o.. Consider longer-term psychosocial treatment for persons with ongoing problems
» related to their substance use, if they do not respond to the initial brief interventions.
Consider pharmacologic intervention to prevent relapse in alcohol dependence;
Evidence-based psychological therapies for disorders due to substance use include
medications include acamprosate, naltrexone and disulfiram. Baclofen can also be used,
structured individual and group programmes that are run over 6-12 weeks or more, and
however, its sedating effects and risk of abuse make it best reserved for specialist settings.
that use techniques such as cognitive behavioural therapy, motivational enhancement
With these medications, an effective response may include a reduction in the quantity
therapy, contingency management therapy, community reinforcement approach, and
and frequency of alcohol consumption, if not complete abstinence. Go to Table 1.
family therapy. Evidence-based social support approaches include employment and
accommodation support.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 119

120
SUB 2
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Management
PROTOCOL
3
Alcohol Withdrawal
»
Provide as quiet and non-stimulating an environment as possible; well-lit during the day
and lit enough at night to prevent falls if the person wakes up at night. PREVENTING AND TREATING WERNICKE’S ENCEPHALOPATHY:
» »
Ensure adequate fluid intake and that electrolyte requirements are met, such as potassium Chronic heavy users of alcohol are at risk for Wernicke’s encephalopathy,
and magnesium. a thiamine deficiency syndrome characterized by confusion, nystagmus,
» ophthalmoplegia (trouble with eye movements), and ataxia (uncoordinated
ADDRESS DEHYDRATION: Maintain adequate hydration including i.v. hydration,
movements).
if needed, and encourage oral fluid intake. Be sure to give thiamine before glucose to avoid
»
precipitating Wernicke’s encephalopathy. To prevent this syndrome, all persons with a history of chronic
» alcohol use should be given thiamine 100 mg p.o. per day.
Pharmacological Intervention:
Give thiamine prior to administering glucose to avoid precipitating
When appropriate, treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms. In the case of planned detoxification,
Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
prevent withdrawal symptoms using diazepam. The dose and duration of diazepam treatment
varies according to the severity of the withdrawal.
– Administer diazepam at an initial dose of up to 40 mg daily (10 mg four times a day or 20 mg
twice a day) for 3-7 days, p.o. Gradually decrease the dose and/or frequency as soon as
symptoms improve. Monitor the person frequently, as each person may respond differently to
this medication.
CLINICAL TIP
– In the hospital setting, diazepam can be given more frequently, (i.e. hourly), and at
For planned alcohol cessation, assess the person’s risk for severe withdrawal.
higher daily doses, up to 120 mg daily for the first 3 days p.o., if necessary, and based on
Ask:
frequent assessment of the person’s withdrawal symptoms and mental status.
Have there been past episodes of severe withdrawal symptoms, including
– In persons with impaired hepatic metabolism, (i.e. persons with signs of liver disease seizures or delirium?
or the elderly), use a single low dose initially of 5-10 mg p.o., as benzodiazepines may Are there other significant medical or psychiatric issues?
have a longer duration of action in these populations. Alternatively, a shorter acting Do significant withdrawal features develop within 6 hours of the person’s last drink?
benzodiazepine such as oxazepam may be used instead of diazepam. See Table 1. Have outpatient cessation attempts failed in the past?
Is the person homeless or without any social support?
– CAUTION
Use caution when initiating or increasing the dose of benzodiazepines, as If risk is high, inpatient detoxification is preferable to outpatient detoxification.
they can cause respiratory depression. Use caution in persons with respiratory
disease and/or hepatic encephalopathy.

CLINICAL TIP: General principles to apply during management of any withdrawal:
Maintain hydration. Depressive symptoms may occur in the post-intoxication period,
Manage specific withdrawal symptoms as they emerge, i.e. treat during or after withdrawal, and/or the person may have pre-existing
nausea with anti-emetics, pain with simple analgesics, and insomnia depression. Be alert to the risk of suicide.
with light sedatives. Offer all persons continued treatment, support, and monitoring after
Allow the person to leave the treatment facility if they wish to do so. successful detoxification, regardless of the setting in which detoxification
Continue treatment and support after detoxification. was delivered.
PROTOCOL
4
Opioid Withdrawal
» »
CAUTION is advised before embarking upon withdrawal from opioids, especially when Methadone: Methadone is given orally at an initial dose of 15-20 mg, increasing, if
there has been injection use. When a decision is made to initiate withdrawal, inform the necessary, to 30 mg per day. Then gradually decrease the dose, until tapered off
person about what to expect, including symptoms and their duration. For example, completely, over 3-10 days. As with buprenorphine, special care should be taken for
withdrawal results in lower tolerance to opioids. This means that if the person resumes individuals taking other sedating medications.
opioid use at their usual dose after withdrawal that they are at an increased risk of »
Clonidine or Lofexidine: If opioid substitution medications are not available, clonidine or
overdosing. Due to these risks, withdrawal is best undertaken when there is a plan for
lofexidine can be used to manage some opioid withdrawal symptoms, namely hyperarousal.
admission to a residential rehabilitation or other psychosocial support programme.
They are given at dose ranges of 0.1-0.15 mg 3 times daily p.o. and are dosed according to
Alternatively, the person may be considered for opioid substitution therapy with either
body weight. Light-headedness and sedation may result. Monitor blood pressure closely.
methadone or buprenorphine; see the opioid agonist maintenance treatment section (see
Other symptoms of withdrawal should also be treated, i.e. nausea with anti-emetics, pain
protocol 5), and select one of the following pharmacological options for management:
with simple analgesics, and insomnia with light sedatives.
»
Buprenorphine: Buprenorphine is given sublingually at a dose range of 4-16 mg per day »
Morphine sulphate: 10-20 mg as an initial dose with 10 mg extra dose if needed.
for 3-14 days for withdrawal management. Before initiating buprenorphine treatment, it is
Sedation and respiratory depression which canbe life threatening. Prolonged use can lead
important to wait until signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal become evident - at least
to dependence. For more details go to Table 1.
8 hours after the last dose of heroin and 24-48 hours after the last dose of methadone;
otherwise, there is a risk that buprenorphine itself will precipitate a withdrawal syndrome.
Special care should be taken for individuals taking other sedating medications.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 121

122
SUB 2
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
5 6
Opioid Agonist Maintenance Treatment Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
» »
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment requires the presence of an Benzodiazepine withdrawal can be managed by switching to a long-
established and regulated national framework. It is characterized by the acting benzodiazepine and gradually decreasing the dose, tapered over
prescription of long-acting opioid agonists (or partial agonists), such as 8-12 weeks, and in conjunction with psychosocial support. More rapid
methadone or buprenorphine, generally on a daily, supervised basis. tapering is possible only if the person is in an inpatient setting in a
There is strong evidence that agonist maintenance treatment with hospital or detoxification facility.
methadone or buprenorphine effectively reduces illicit drug use, the »
If severe, uncontrolled benzodiazepine withdrawal develops or occurs
spread of HIV, mortality, and criminality, as well as improving physical
due to a sudden or unplanned cessation, consult a specialist or other
health, mental health, and social functioning.
available resource person immediately to start a high-dose benzodiazepine
»
Monitoring: Medications used for opioid agonist maintenance treatment sedation regime and to hospitalise the person. Be cautious with
are open to misuse and diversion, hence, programmes should use various unsupervised dispensing of benzodiazepines to unknown patients.
methods of limiting the risk of diversion, including supervised
consumption.
»
For more details please see Table 1.

PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.1 Psychoeducation Throughout the discussion it is important to include all parts 6. Have a discussion with the person based on the state-
of the process: expressing empathy and building an atmosphere ments about their substance use, its causes, consequences
of trust, while also pointing out contradictions in their and their personal goals, allowing exploration of apparent
Disorders due to substance use can often be effectively
narrative, and challenging false beliefs. Avoid arguing with inconsistencies between the consequences of substance
treated, and people can and do get better.
the person. They should feel that the practitioner is there to use and the person’s stated goals.
Discussing substance use can bring about feelings of support them and not to criticize them. If the person is unable
7. D iscuss options for change based on the choice of realistic
embarrassment or shame for many people. Always use a to commit to ending their harmful pattern of substance use at
goals and try to find a mutually agreed course of action.
non-judgmental approach when speaking with people about this time, discuss why this is the case, rather than forcing the
substance use. When people feel judged, they may be less person to say what they think is expected. 8. Support the person to enact these changes by commu-
open to speaking with you. Try not to express surprise at any nicating your confidence in them to make positive changes in
responses given. Techniques for more in depth discussions: their life, by provide information on the next steps as needed
(further review, detoxification, psycho-social support), and by
Communicate confidently that it is possible to stop or reduce 1. Provide personalised feedback to the person about the
providing the person with take-home materials if available.
hazardous or harmful alcohol use and encourage the person risks associated with their pattern of substance use,
to come back if he or she wants to discuss the issue further. whether or not they have a pattern of HARMFUL USE or
Examples of questions to ask. Non-judgmentally elicit
DEPENDENCE, and the specific harms they may be
A person is more likely to succeed in reducing or stopping from the person their own thoughts about their substance
experiencing or causing to others.
substance use if the decision is their own. use by asking the following questions:
2. Encourage the person to take responsibility for their
1. Reasons for their substance use. (Ask: “Have you ever
substance use choices, and the choice of whether or not to
thought about why you use [substance]?”)
2.2 Motivational Interviewing seek assistance for their substance use. Do this by asking
them how concerned THEY are about their substance use. 2. What they perceive as the benefits from their use.
(Brief Intervention)
(Ask: “What does [substance] do for you? Does it cause
3. Ask the person the reasons for their substance use,
you any problems?”)
including as a response to other issues such as mental health
Brief interventions using motivational interviewing is an
problems or specific stressors, and the perceived benefits 3. What they perceive as the actual and potential harms from
approach to discussing substance use in a non-judgemental
they have from substance use, even if only in the short term. the substance use. (Ask: “Has [substance] use caused you
way. It encourages a person to reflect on their own
any harm? Can you see it causing harm in the future?”)
substance use choices. It can be used as part of a very brief 4. Ask about their perception of both the positive and
encounter for addressing risks or harmful substance use. It negative consequences of their substance use and, if 4. What is most important to the person.
can also be used as part of a longer discussion that takes necessary, challenge any overstatement of the benefits (Ask: “What is most important to you in your life?”)
place over several sessions that address dependent patterns and understatement of the risks/harms.
of substance use; this is referred to as Motivational
5. Ask about the person’s personal goals, and whether or
Enhancement Therapy.
not their substance use is helping them or preventing
them from reaching these goals.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 123

124
SUB 2
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Management
2.3 S trategies for Reducing and
If the person injects drugs: Provide information and education about disorders due
Stopping Use Inform the person about the risks of intravenous drug use, to substance use.
which include: being at higher risk of infections such as Offer an assessment of their personal, social, and mental health
Steps to reducing or stopping the use of all substances: HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B and C, skin infections that can cause needs. Offer treatment for any priority mental health disorders.
If the person is interested in reducing their substance use, septicaemia, endocarditis, spinal abscesses, meningitis,
discuss the following steps with them. and even death.
Inform them about and help them access support groups for
families and carers (if available) and other social resources.
Identify triggers for use and ways to avoid them. For Considering that the person may not stop injecting drugs
example: pubs where people are drinking or areas where the right away, provide information on less risky injection
person used to obtain drugs, etc. techniques. Emphasize the importance of using sterile CLINICAL TIP:
needles and syringes each time they inject and to never HIV/TB/HEPATITIS and SUBSTANCE USE
Identify emotional cues for use and ways to cope with them
share injecting equipment with others.
(i.e. relationship problems, difficulties at work, etc.).
P eople who inject drugs are at increased risk of HIV/AIDS and
Provide information on how to access needle and syringe
Encourage the person not to keep substances at home. hepatitis, particularly if they do not use sterile injection
exchange programs where they exist or other sources of
equipment or have unsafe sex in exchange for drugs; once
2.4 M utual Help Groups
sterile injection equipment.
infected, they also have a worse prognosis. HIV/AIDS also
Encourage and offer, at minimum, annual testing for increases the risk of TB infection, and active TB is a main
Mutual help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous, blood-borne viral illnesses, including HIV/AIDS and cause of death in people living with HIV/AIDS. People who
Narcotics Anonymous, or Smart Recovery can be helpful Hepatitis B and C. use alcohol and drugs heavily are also at increased risk for TB.
referrals for persons with disorders due to substance use. Therefore, a common presentation is of a person who has a
– Encourage Hepatitis B vaccination
They provide information, structured activities, and peer combination of drug use, particularly i.v. heroin use, and
– Ensure condom availability
support in a non-judgmental environment. Find out what infection with TB, HIV/AIDS, and hepatitis at the same time.
– Ensure availability of treatment for people with
mutual help groups are available locally.
HIV/AIDS and hepatitis S ervices that treat people who use drugs and alcohol
should regularly test all people who inject drugs for
2.5 S trategies for Preventing Harm
Treatment of co-morbidities: HIV/AIDS and hepatitis, and should have a high level
of suspicion for TB in any person with a cough, fever,
from Drug Use and Treating
Have a low threshold for screening for TB in people who
night sweats, or weight loss.
have disorders due to substance use.
Related Conditions
T reatment of HIV/AIDS and TB requires taking daily medica-
Consider investigations for and treatment of sexually
tions, where every single day is important. Directly obser-
transmitted diseases.
Encourages the person to engage in less risky behaviour. ving the treatment can improve treatment adherence. If the
– Advise not to drive if intoxicated. person is also opioid dependent, providing daily observed
2.4 C arer Support
methadone or buprenorphine treatment at the same place
– If the person uses opioids, provide intramuscular or
and time will further facilitate treatment adherence.
intranasal naloxone for family members, which family
Supporting family and carers:
members can keep and use if the person has overdosed H epatitis treatments occur daily or weekly. Patients
while waiting for help to arrive or en route to hospital. Discuss the impact of disorders due to substance use on with Hepatitis B or C should be advised to avoid alcohol
other family members, including children, with the person’s completely.
family and/or carers.

EPI 2
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS Management
Special populations
ADOLESCENTS W OMEN WHO ARE OF CHILD-BEARING AGE, PREGNANT,
OR BREASTFEEDING
How to Assess the Adolescent:
Clarify the confidential nature of the health care discussion, Alcohol Use Drug Use
including in what circumstances the adolescent’s parents or
Advise women who are pregnant or considering becoming Inquire about the woman’s menstrual cycle and inform her
carers will be given any information.
pregnant to avoid alcohol completely. that substance use can interfere with the menstrual cycle,
Ask what else is going on in the adolescent’s life? Identify sometimes creating the false impression that pregnancy is
Inform women that consuming even small amounts of alcohol
the most important underlying issues for the adolescent. not possible.
early in pregnancy can harm the developing fetus, and that
Keep in mind that adolescents may not be able to fully
larger amounts of alcohol can result in a syndrome of severe Discuss the harmful effects of illicit drugs on fetal
articulate what is bothering them.
developmental problems (Fetal Alcohol Syndrome). development and ensure that the woman has access to
Open-ended questions may be helpful in eliciting information effective contraception.
Advise women who are breastfeeding to avoid alcohol
in the following areas: Home, Education & Employment,
completely. Advise and support women who are pregnant to stop
Eating, Activities, Drugs and Alcohol, Sexuality, Safety, and
using all illicit drugs. Pregnant opioid dependent women
Suicide/Depression. Allow sufficient time for discussion. Given the benefits of exclusive breastfeeding (particularly in
should generally be advised to take an opioid agonist such as
Also assess for other priority mental health conditions. If the first 6 months), if mothers continue to drink alcohol they
methadone.
any priority conditions are identified, see CMH. should be advised to limit their alcohol consumption, and to
minimise the alcohol content of their breast milk, such as by Screen babies of mothers with drug use disorders for
Psychoeducation for the Adolescent:
breastfeeding before drinking alcohol and not again until withdrawal symptoms (also known as Neonatal Abstinence
after blood levels fall to zero (allowing approximately 2 hours Syndrome). Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome due to maternal
Provide the adolescent and their parents with information on
for each drink consumed, i.e. 4 hours if two drinks are opioid use should be treated with low doses of opioids (such
the effects of alcohol and other substances on individual
consumed), or by using expressed breast milk. as morphine) or barbiturates. For more details please refer
health and social functioning.
to Guidelines for the identification and management of
Encourage a change in the adolescent’s environment and activi- CAUTION substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy
ties, rather than focusing on the adolescent’s behaviour as being a All mothers with harmful substance use and young Available on http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/
“problem.” Encourage participation in school or work and activi- children should be offered any social support services 107130/1/9789241548731_eng.pdf.
ties that occupy the adolescent’s time. Encourage participation in that are available, including additional postnatal
Advise and support breastfeeding mothers not to use
group activities that are safe and facilitate the adolescent’s build- visits, parenting training, and child care during
any illicit drugs.
ing of skills and contribution to their communities. It is important medical visits.
that adolescents take part in activities which interest them. Advise and support mothers with disorders due to substance
use to breastfeed exclusively for at least the first 6 months,
Encourage parents and/or carers to know where the adolescent
unless there is specialist advice not to breastfeed.
is, who they are with, what they are doing, when they will
be home, and to expect the adolescent to be accountable
for their activities.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 125

126
SUB 2
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Management
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
TABLE 1: Medication Chart
CLASS / INDICATION MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
BENZODIAZEPINES Diazepam 10-20 mg for observable features of alcohol with- Sedation and respiratory depression which can Do not use in people who are sedated. Beware of
drawal or stimulant intoxication every 2 hours until be life threatening. Prolonged use can lead to combining with other sedatives. Patients should not
To treat alcohol withdrawal,
features of alcohol withdrawal/stimulant intoxication dependence. drive. Duration of effect may be prolonged in persons
stimulant intoxication, and
are no longer observable or the person is lightly with severe liver disease. Supervise dosing to minimise
psychosis
sedated. Lower doses (up to 10 mg four times a day) the risk of: diversion (i.e. selling the medication to
for alcohol withdrawal in an outpatient setting. somebody else).
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS Naloxone 0.4-2 mg i.v., i.m., subcutaneous or intranasal. Discomfort or withdrawal symptoms may result.
Repeat doses as needed.
To treat opioid overdose
VITAMINS Thiamine 100 mg p.o. daily for 5 days to prevent Wernicke’s
(Vitamin B1) encephalopathy.
To prevent or treat Wernicke’s
100 mg – 500 mg i.v. or i.m. two to three times
encephalopathy
daily for 3-5 days to treat Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
OPIOID AGONISTS Methadone Opioid withdrawal: Methadone initial dose Sedation, confusion, nausea, vomiting, consti- Use with caution in patients with cardiac or
20 mg, with a supplemental dose of 5-10 mg pation, possible hormonal changes, decreased respiratory disease.
To treat opioid withdrawal and 4 hours later if necessary. sex drive, ECG changes such as prolonged QT
dependence interval or bradycardia, hypotension, respiratory
Opioid maintenance: initial dose 10-20 mg with
depression.
supplementary dose of 10 mg if needed, increasing
the daily dose by 5-10 mg every few days if needed
until the person is no longer experiencing opioid
withdrawal and not using illicit opioids. Maintain
until ready to cease opioid agonist treatment.
Buprenorphine Initial dose of 4-8 mg, increasing by 4-8 mg each day as Sedation, dizziness, ataxia, nausea, vomiting, – Use with caution in congestive heart failure,
needed until the person is no longer experiencing constipation, respiratory depression. respiratory disease, or liver disease.
opioid withdrawal and not using illicit opioids. Maintain – Potential for abuse.
until ready to cease opioid agonist treatment. – Abrupt cessation can cause withdrawal symptoms.
Morphine 10-20 mg as an initial dose with 10 mg extra dose Sedation and respiratory depression which can Do not use in people who are sedated. Beware of
sulphate if needed. be life threatening. Prolonged use can lead to combining with other sedatives. The person should not
dependence. drive. Supervise dosing to minimise the risk of diversion.
Give longer acting opioids, such as methadone or bupre-
norphine, once per day to outpatients, when available.

CLASS / INDICATION MEDICATION DOSING SIDE EFFECTS CONTRAINDICATIONS / CAUTIONS
ALPHA ADRENERGIC Clonidine Start 0.1 mg 2-3 times daily. Increase as tolerated Sedation, light-headedness, dizziness, headache, Use caution in cardiac, cerebrovascular, and liver
AGONISTS in divided doses to manage withdrawal symptoms, nausea/vomiting, dry mouth, constipation, sexual disease. Use lower doses in kidney disease.
to a maximum of 1 mg daily. dysfunction, depression, agitation, low blood Be aware of the potential for abuse. Monitor vital
pressure, tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, and signs closely.
To treat opioid withdrawal
AV block.
DO NOT stop abruptly, as withdrawal can cause
rebound hypertension. Avoid in women who are
pregnant or breastfeeding.
Lofexidine Start 0.4 - 0.6 mg twice daily. Increase Sedation, light-headedness, low blood Use caution in cardiac, cerebrovascular, and renal
as needed by 0.4-0.8 mg daily. Maximum single pressure, ECG changes such as prolonged disease. Avoid in patients with prolonged QT
dose: 0.8 mg. Maximum daily dose: 2.4 mg QT interval and sinus bradycardia. syndrome, metabolic disarray, or if they are taking
(in 2-4 divided doses). any other QT-prolonging medications.
Monitor vital signs closely.
DO NOT stop medication abruptly, as withdrawal
may cause rebound hypertension.
MEDICATIONS TO Acamprosate Start 2 tablets of 333 mg p.o. each 3 times per day Diarrhoea, flatulence, nausea/vomiting, abdominal In moderate kidney disease, give a lower dose,
PREVENT RELAPSE for 12 months. If the person weighs less than 60 kg, pain, depression, anxiety, suicidality, itching. 333 mg p.o. 3 times per day.
IN ALCOHOL give 2 tablets 2 times per day p.o. for 12 months. Occasionally, a maculopapular rash can occur, and
DEPENDENCE rarely, bullous skin reactions. CONTRAINDICATED in severe kidney disease
and liver disease.
Naltrexone Start 50 mg daily for 6-12 months. In opioid Sedation, dizziness, nausea/vomiting, abdominal Risk of FATAL OVERDOSE in patients who use
To suppress the urge to drink
dependence, ensure that there has been no opioid pain, insomnia, anxiety, reduced energy, joint opioids more than 24 hours after their last dose of
use in the last 7 days (for example by administration and muscle pain. Monitor liver function due to naltrexone, due to the rapid loss of antagonistic effect.
of dose of naloxone). risk of liver toxicity.
DO NOT use in patients with liver failure or acute
hepatitis.
Disulfiram Start 200-400 mg daily. Drowsiness, dizziness, headache, flushing, Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), monamine oxidase
sweating, dry mouth, nausea/vomiting, tremor, inhibitors (MAOIs), antipsychotics, vasodilators, and
foul body odour, sexual dysfunction. Rarely, alpha or beta adrenergic antagonists make the
psychotic reactions, allergic dermatitis, disulfiram-alcohol reaction more serious. Sensitisation
peripheral neuritis, or hepatic cell damage can to alcohol continues 6-14 days after taking disulfiram,
occur. Severe reactions can lead to confusion, even if in small amounts.
cardiovascular collapse, and death.
DO NOT use with alcohol, as reactions can be
life-threatening or fatal.
DO NOT use in women who are pregnant or
breastfeeding.
CONTRAINDICATED in people with hypertension,
heart, liver, or kidney disease, a history of cerebro-
vascular accidents, psychosis, impulsivity, or if at risk
of suicide.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 127

128
SUB 3
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE Follow-up
SUB 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
1 »
Harmful use: Follow-up in one
month. Follow-up as needed
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT thereafter.
»
Dependence: Follow-up several
times per week in the first two
weeks, then weekly in the first
At every visit, assess:
month. Once improving,
» decrease frequency to monthly
Quantity and frequency of substance use, mental health, physical
and as needed thereafter.
health, risk and protective factors (e.g. relationships, accommodation,
employment, etc.)
»
Ask about factors that lead to substance use and consequences
of substance use
RECENT CESSATION OF USE LONG TERM CESSATION OR
ONGOING SUBSTANCE USE OR SHIFT TO NON-HARMFUL USE NON-HARMFUL USE
»
D evelop strategies to reduce harm
»
C onsider urine testing to confirm abstinence
»
C onsider occasional urine testing to confirm
»
T reat health problems
»
G ive positive feedback to encourage the
non-use
»
D evelop strategies to reduce use
maintenance of abstinence/non-harmful use
»
P ositive feedback
»
A rrange detoxification or maintenance
»
T reat other medical problems
»
S upport factors which reduce the risk of
treatment if client agrees
»
C onsider relapse prevention medications for
relapse (such as housing and employment)
»
C onduct frequent review and outreach
alcohol and opioid dependence
»
T reat other medical problems
»
C onsider psychosocial therapies to prevent
»
E ncourage participation in mutual help groups
relapse and mutual help groups »
L ess frequent review
»
S upport factors which reduce the risk of relapse
such as housing and employment

BOX 2. SIGNS OF CHRONIC SUBSTANCE USE & INVESTIGATIONS TO CONSIDER
SIGNS OF CHRONIC, HEAVY ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION: SIGNS OF CHRONIC DRUG USE:
Liver disease: look for jaundiced (yellow) skin and eyes, palpable and tender liver Difficulty caring for self, poor dentition, parasitic skin infections such as lice or scabies,
edge (in early liver disease), ascites (distended abdomen filled with fluid), spider naevi and malnutrition.
(spider-like blood vessels visible on the surface of the skin), and altered mental status
Signs of injection: look for injection sites on arms or legs, with both new and old
(hepatic encephalopathy).
marks visible. Ask the person where they inject and inspect the sites to make sure there
Cerebellar damage: Look for problems with balance, walking, coordinating movements, are no signs of local infection.
and nystagmus.
Common health complications of injecting drug use: people who inject drugs have a
Investigations to consider: higher risk of contracting infections such as HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B and C, and tuberculosis.
They are also at high risk for skin infections at their injection sites. In some cases, this
– Liver enzymes: elevated liver enzymes and elevated ammonia indicate liver disease.
can spread through the blood and cause septicaemia, endocarditis, spinal abscesses,
– Complete blood count: look for macrocytic anaemia and low platelets. meningitis, or even death.
Investigations to consider:
– Urine drug screen: for emergency cases, a urine drug screen should be conducted
whenever intoxication, withdrawal, or overdose is suspected, especially in cases when
the person is unable to convey what they have ingested.
– If the person has been injecting drugs, offer serological testing for blood-borne viruses,
HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B and C, etc.
– If the person has had unprotected sex, offer testing for sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV, syphilis, chlamydia, gonorrhoea, and human papilloma virus (HPV).
– Obtain a tuberculosis test, sputum sample, and a chest x-ray if tuberculosis is
suspected. Look for signs and symptoms such as chronic productive cough, fevers,
chills, and weight loss.
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE 129

130
DISORDERS DUE TO SUBSTANCE USE

SELF-HARM / SUICIDE
Suicide is the act of deliberately killing oneself. Self-harm is a Evaluate for thoughts, plans and acts of self-harm during the
broader term referring to intentional self-inflicted poisoning or initial assessment and periodically thereafter, as required. Attend
injury, which may or may not have a fatal intent or outcome. to the person’s mental state and emotional distress.
Any person over 10 years of age experiencing any of the following
conditions should be asked about thoughts or plans of self-harm
in the last month, and about acts of self-harm in the last year: CLINICAL TIP:
Asking about self-harm does NOT provoke acts of self-harm. It often reduces
»
Any of the priority MNS conditions. See Master Chart ( MC) anxiety associated with thoughts or acts of self-harm and helps the person feel
» Chronic pain understood. However, try to establish a relationship with the person before asking
» questions about self-harm. Ask the person to explain their reasons for harming
Acute emotional distress
themselves.
131

132
SUI
SELF HARM / SUICIDE
SUI Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
A ssess if the person has attempted Management Protocols
a medically serious act of self-harm
1. Medically serious act of self-harm
2. Imminent risk of self-harm/suicide
Assess for imminent risk of
3. Risk of self-harm/suicide
self-harm/suicide
General Management and
Assess for any of the priority MNS conditions
Psychosocial Interventions
Assess for chronic pain
Assess for severity of emotional symptoms
FOLLOW-UP

SUI 1
SUI 1 Assessment
ASSESS FOR SELF-HARM/SUICIDE IF THE PERSON PRESENTS WITH EITHER:
E xtreme hopelessness and despair, current thoughts/plan/act of self-harm suicide or history
thereof, act of self-harm with signs of poisoning/intoxication, bleeding from self-inflicted wound,
loss of consciousness and/or extreme lethargy, OR
A ny of the priority MNS conditions, chronic pain or extreme emotional distress
1
Has the person attempted a medically serious act of self-harm?
Assess if there is evidence of self-injury and/or
signs/symptoms requiring urgent medical treatment:
– Signs of poisoning or intoxication – Loss of consciousness
– Bleeding from self-inflicted wound – Extreme lethargy
CLINICAL TIP
Management for the medically serious act of
If medically stable, perform appropriate self-harm is required.
management, as needed.
Go to PROTOCOL 1
R eturn to STEP 2 2 once person is medically stable.
SELF-HARM /SUICIDE 133

134
SUI 1
SELF HARM / SUICIDE Assessment
2
Is there an imminent risk of self-harm/suicide?
Ask the person and carers if there are ANY of the following:
– Current thoughts or plan of self-harm/suicide
– History of thoughts or plan of self-harm in the past month or act of self-harm in the past year
in a person who is now extremely agitated, violent, distressed or lacks communication
IMMINENT RISK OF
SELF-HARM/SUICIDE is likely
G o to PROTOCOL 2, manage,
and then continue to STEP 3 3
Is there a history of thoughts or plan
of self-harm in the past month or act of
self-harm in the past year?
Imminent risk of self-harm/suicide is
unlikely, but a risk may still persist.
G o to PROTOCOL 3, manage,
Risk of self-harm/suicide is unlikely. and then continue to STEP 33

3
Does the person have concurrent MNS conditions?
– Depression – Child & adolescent mental – Psychoses
– Disorders due to substance use and behavioral disorders – Epilepsy
M anage the concurrent conditions.
See relevant modules.
4
Does the person have chronic pain?
M anage the pain and treat any
relevant medical conditions.
5
Does the person have emotional symptoms severe enough to warrant clinical management?
– Difficulty carrying out usual work, school, – Repeated self-medication for emotional – Marked distress or repeated help-seeking
domestic or social activities distress, or unexplained physical symptoms
Manage the emotional symptoms.
Go to SUI 3 (Follow-up)
Go to OTH
SELF-HARM /SUICIDE 135

136
SUI 2
SELF HARM / SUICIDE Management
SUI 2 Management
PROTOCOL PROTOCOL PROTOCOL
1 2 3
Medically Serious Act of Self-Harm Imminent Risk of Self-Harm/Suicide Risk of Self-Harm/Suicide
» » »
For all cases: Place the person in a Remove means of self-harm/suicide. Offer and activate psychosocial support.
secure and supportive environment at a » (2.3)
Create a secure and supportive environment;
health facility. »
if possible, offer a separate, quiet room while Consult a mental health specialist, if available.
»
DO NOT leave the person alone. waiting for treatment. »
Maintain regular contact and Follow-Up.
» »
Medically treat injury or poisoning. DO NOT leave the person alone.
If there is acute pesticide intoxication, follow »
Supervise and assign a named staff or family
“Management of pesticide intoxication”. (2.1)
member to ensure person’s safety at all times.
»
If hospitalization is needed, continue to »
Attend to mental state and emotional distress.
monitor the person closely to prevent suicide.
»
» Provide psychoeducation to the person and
Care for the person with self-harm. (2.2)
their carers. (2.5)
»
Offer and activate psychosocial support. »
Offer and activate psychosocial support.
(2.3)
(2.3)
»
Offer carers support. (2.4) »
Offer carers support. (2.4)
»
Consult a mental health specialist, »
Consult a mental health specialist, if available.
if available.
»
» Maintain regular contact and Follow-Up.
Maintain regular contact and Follow-Up.

2.1 Management of pesticide 2.2 Care for the person with self-harm
intoxication
Place the person in a secure and supportive environment Hospitalization in non-psychiatric services of a general
If the health care facility has a minimum set of skills and at a health facility ( do not leave them alone). If the hospital is not recommended for the prevention of self-harm.
resources, then treat using the WHO document, “Clinical person must wait for treatment, offer an environment that However, if admission to a general (non-psychiatric) hospital is
Management of Acute Pesticide Intoxication” (http://www. minimizes distress; if possible, in a separate, quiet room necessary for the management of the medical consequences
who.int/mental_health/publications/9789241596732/en). with constant supervision and contact with a designated of self-harm, monitor the person closely to prevent further
staff or family member to ensure safety at all times. self-harm in the hospital.
Otherwise, transfer the person immediately to a health
facility that has the following resources: Remove access to means of self-harm. If prescribing medication:
– Skills and knowledge on how to resuscitate individuals Consult a mental health specialist, if available. – See relevant mhGAP-IG modules for pharmacological
and assess for clinical features of pesticide poisoning; interventions in the management of concurrent conditions.
Mobilize family, friends and other concerned individuals or
– Skills and knowledge to manage the airway; in particular, available community resources to monitor and support the – Use medicines that are the least hazardous, in case
to intubate and support breathing until a ventilator can person during the imminent risk period (see “Offer and of intentional overdose.
be attached; activate psychosocial support”. (2.3)
– Give prescriptions as short courses (e.g. one week
– Atropine and means for its intravenous (i.v.) administration Treat people who have self-harmed with the same care, at a time).
if signs of cholinergic poisoning develop; respect and privacy given to other people, and be sensitive
to the emotional distress associated with self-harm.
– Diazepam and means for its i.v. administration if the
person develops seizures. Include the carers if the person wants their support during
assessment and treatment; if possible, the psychosocial
Consider administering activated charcoal if the person
assessment should include a one-to-one interview
is conscious, gives informed consent, and presents for care
between the person and the health worker, to explore
within one hour of the poisoning.
private issues.
Forced vomiting is not recommended.
Provide emotional support to carers/family members if they
need it. (2.4)
Oral fluids should not be given.
Ensure continuity of care.
SELF-HARM /SUICIDE 137

138
SUI 2
SELF HARM / SUICIDE Management
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
2.3 Offer and activate psychosocial 2.4 Carers support 2.5 Psychoeducation
support
Inform carers and family members that asking about suicide Key messages to the person and the carers
Offer support to the person will often help the person feel relieved, less anxious, and better
– If one has thoughts of self-harm/suicide, seek help
understood.
immediately from a trusted family member, friend or health
– Explore reasons and ways to stay alive.
Carers and family members of people at risk of self-harm often care provider.
– Focus on the person’s strengths by encouraging them to experience severe stress. Provide emotional support to them if
– It is okay to talk about suicide. Talking about suicide does
talk of how earlier problems have been resolved. they need it.
not provoke the act of suicide.
– Consider problem-solving therapy to help people with acts Inform carers that even though they may feel frustrated
– Suicides are preventable.
of self-harm within the last year, if sufficient human resources with the person, they should avoid hostility and severe criticism
are available. Go to Essential care and practice ECP towards the vulnerable person at risk of self-harm/suicide. – Having an episode of self-harm/suicide is an indicator of
severe emotional distress. The person does not see an
Activate psychosocial support
alternative or a solution. Therefore, it is important to get
the person immediate support for emotional problems and
– Mobilize family, friends, concerned individuals and other
stressors.
available resources to ensure close monitoring of the
person as long as the risk of self-harm/suicide persists. – Means of self-harm (e.g. pesticides, firearms, medications)
should be removed from the home.
– Advise the person and carers to restrict access to means
of self-harm/suicide (e.g. pesticides/toxic substances, – The social network, including the family and relevant
prescription medications, firearms, etc.) when the person others, is important for provision of social support.
has thoughts or plans of self-harm/suicide.
– Optimize social support from available community
resources. These include informal resources, such as
relatives, friends, acquaintances, colleagues and religious
leaders or formal community resources, if available, such
as crisis centres, and local mental health centres.

SUI 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
1
»
MAINTAIN REGULAR CONTACT (via
telephone, home visits, letters or contact
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT
cards) more frequently initially (e.g.
daily, weekly) for the first 2 months.
» Follow-up for as long as the risk of
Is the person improving?
self-harm/suicide persists.
»
Decrease contact as the person improves.
»
Continue following-up for 2 years, further
decreasing contact according to improvement
(e.g. once every 2-4 weeks after the initial 2 months,
and twice in the second year). »
Increase intensity or duration of contact as necessary.
»
Refer to specialist as needed.
2
ROUTINELY ASSESS FOR THOUGHTS AND
PLANS OF SELF-HARM/SUICIDE
»
At every contact, routinely assess for suicidal thoughts and plans.
Is the risk of self-harm/suicide imminent? See SUI 1 (Assessment).
SELF-HARM /SUICIDE 139

140
SELF HARM / SUICIDE

OTHER SIGNIFICANT
MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS
This module aims to provide basic guidance on management Other mental health complaints are considered significant
of a range of mental health complaints not covered elsewhere in when they impair daily functioning or when the person seeks
this guide. Some of these complaints may be similar to depression, help for them. Other mental health complaints can be due
but upon closer examination are distinct from the conditions to stress.
covered in this guide.
T his module should not be considered for people who meet the criteria for any of the mhGAP priority conditions (except self-harm).
T his module should only be used after explicitly ruling out depression.
»
This module should be used when helping adults. In case the person is a child or adolescent, go to CMH.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS 141

142
OTH
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS
OTH Quick Overview
ASSESSMENT MANAGEMENT
R ule out physical causes that would fully Management Protocols
explain the presenting symptoms
1. Other significant mental health complaints
2. Other significant mental health complaints in
Rule out depression or other MNS conditions
people exposed to extreme stressors
Assess if the person is seeking help to
relieve symptoms or has considerable
difficulty with daily functioning
Assess if the person has been exposed to FOLLOW-UP
extreme stressors
Assess if there is imminent risk of
self-harm/suicide

Ass
O
e
T
ss
H
m
1
e nt
Assessment
COMMON PRESENTATIONS OF OTHER SIGNIFICANT
MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS
F eeling extremely tired, depressed, irritated, anxious or stressed.
M edically unexplained somatic complaints (i.e. somatic symptoms that do not have a
known physical cause that fully explains the symptom).
1
Is there a physical cause that fully explains the presenting symptoms?
Manage any physical cause identified and
recheck to see if the symptoms persist.
2
Is this depression or another MNS condition discussed
in another module of this guide?
Go to relevant module.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS 143

144
OTH 1
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS Assessment
3
Is the person seeking help to relieve symptoms or having considerable
difficulty with daily functioning because of their symptoms?
No treatment needed.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT
MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS are likely
4
Has the person been exposed to extreme stressors?
(e.g. physical or sexual violence, major accidents, bereavement
or other major losses)
Go to PROTOCOL 1 and 2
Go to PROTOCOL 1
IF THERE IS IMMINENT RISK OF SUICIDE,
ASSESS AND MANAGE before continuing
to Protocol 1 and 2 (Go to » SUI).

OTH 2 Management
PROTOCOL
1
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS
»
DO NOT prescribe anti-anxiety or antidepressant medicines – Inform the person that no serious disease has been identified. Communicate the
(unless advised by a specialist). normal clinical and test findings.
» – If the person insists on further investigations, consider saying that performing
DO NOT give vitamin injections or other ineffective treatments.
unnecessary investigations can be harmful because they can cause unnecessary
» In all cases, reduce stress and strengthen social supports as worry and side-effects.
described in Essential care and practice (ECP). – Acknowledge that the symptoms are not imaginary and that it is still important to
address symptoms that cause significant distress.
– Address current psychosocial stressors.
– Ask the person for their own explanation of the cause of their symptoms, and
– Strengthen supports.
ask about their concerns. This may give clues about the source of distress, help build a
– Teach stress management such as relaxation techniques (see Box 1 at end of module).
trusting relationship with the person and increase the person’s adherence to treatment.
»
When no physical condition is identified that fully explains a presenting – Explain that emotional suffering/stress often involves the experience of bodily
somatic symptom, acknowledge the reality of the symptoms and provide sensations, such as stomach aches, muscle tension, etc. Ask for and discuss
possible explanations. potential links between the person’s emotions/stress and symptoms.
– Avoid ordering more laboratory or other investigations unless there is a clear – Encourage continuation of (or gradual return to) daily activities.
medical indication, e.g. abnormal vital signs. – Remember to apply the practice of reducing stress and strengthening social
– In case a further investigation is ordered anyway, reduce unrealistic expectations support. Go to » ECP.
by telling the person that the expected result is likely to be normal.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS 145

146
OTH 2
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS Management
PROTOCOL
2
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS
IN PEOPLE EXPOSED TO EXTREME STRESSORS
(e.g. physical or sexual violence, major accidents, bereavement or other major loss)
»
In all cases, whether or not the person presents with emotional, physical or
– In most cases, grief will diminish over time. One may think that the sadness, yearning
behavioural problems after exposure to an extreme stressor, provide support
or pain one feels will never go away, but in most cases, these feelings lessen over time.
as described in PROTOCOL 1. Listen carefully.
Sometimes a person may feel fine for a while, then something reminds them of the
» loss and they may feel as bad as they did at first. There is no right or wrong way to
DO NOT pressure the person to talk about the event.
feel grief. Sometimes one might feel very sad, other times numb, and at other times
» one might be able to enjoy oneself. These experiences usually become less intense
Address the person’s social needs.
and less frequent over time.
– Ask the person about his/her needs and concerns.
»
In case of the loss of a loved one, discuss and support culturally appropriate
– Help the person to address basic needs, access services and connect with family
adjustment and/or mourning processes.
and other social supports.
– Ask if appropriate mourning ceremonies/rituals have happened or been planned.
– Protect the person from (further) harm, if needed.
If this is not the case, discuss the obstacles and how to address them.
– Encourage the person to return to previous, normal activities, e.g. at school
»
or work, at home, and socially, if it is feasible and culturally appropriate. If prolonged grief disorder is suspected, consult a specialist for further
assessment and management.
»
In case of any major loss explain that:
– The person may have prolonged grief disorder if the symptoms involve
– It is normal to grieve for any major loss. One can grieve for a person, a place, or
considerable difficulty with daily functioning for at least 6 months and include
property or the loss of one’s own health and wellbeing. Grief has both mental and
severe preoccupation with or intense longing for the deceased person
physical effects.
accompanied by intense emotional pain.
– People grieve in different ways. Some people show strong emotions while others do
not. Crying does not mean one is weak. People who do not cry may feel the emotional
pain just as deeply but have other ways of expressing it.

» »
In the case of reactions to recent exposure to a potentially If post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is suspected, consult a specialist
traumatic event, explain that: for further assessment and management.
– People often have reactions after such events. The reactions may be highly variable – After a potentially traumatic event, the person may have PTSD if the symptoms
from person to person and change over time. involve considerable difficulty with daily functioning for at least 1 month and
include recurring frightening dreams, flashbacks or intrusive memories of the
– They can include somatic symptoms such as palpitations, aches and pains, gastric
events accompanied by intense fear or horror; deliberate avoidance of reminders
upset, and headaches and emotional and behavioural symptoms that include sleep
of the event; excessive concern and alertness to danger or reacting strongly to
disturbance, sadness, anxiety, irritation and aggression.
loud noises or unexpected movements.
– Such feelings can be exacerbated or can reappear when reminders of the stressful
event or new stressors occur.
– In most cases the symptoms are likely to diminish over time, particularly if the
person gets rest, social support, and engages in stress reduction. Go to » ECP.
Go to Box 1.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS 147

148
OTH 3
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS Follow-up
OTH 3 Follow-up
RECOMMENDATIONS ON
FREQUENCY OF CONTACT
»
Ask the person to return in
2-4 weeks if their symptoms do
not improve or if, at any time,
their symptoms worsen.
ASSESS FOR IMPROVEMENT
Is the person improving?
If the person is not improving or the person or
»
Contine with treatment plan
the carer insists on further investigations and
»
Follow-up as needed treatment:
»
Review Protocols 1 and 2
»
Consider consulting a specialist.

BOX 1: RELAXATION TRAINING INSTRUCTIONS
» »
Explain what you will be doing. F ocus on breathing techniques.
“I am going to teach you how to breathe in a way that will help relax your “Try to breathe from your stomach with me. Remember, we start by
body and your mind. It will take some practice before you feel the full breathing out until all the air is out; then breathe in. If you can, breathe in
benefits of this breathing technique. The reason this strategy focuses on through your nose and out through your mouth. The second step is to slow
breathing is because when we feel stressed our breathing becomes fast and the rate of your breathing down. Take three seconds to breathe in, two
shallow, making us feel more tense. To begin to relax, you need to start by seconds to hold your breath, and three seconds to breathe out. I will count
changing your breathing. Before we start, we will relax the body.” with you. You may close your eyes or keep them open. Slowly breathe in, 1,
2, 3. Hold, 1, 2. Now breathe out, 1, 2, 3.” Repeat this breathing exercise for
»
Slowly start relaxation exercises and demonstrate breathing.
approximately one minute, rest for one minute then repeat the cycle two
more times.
“Gently shake and loosen your arms and legs. Let them go floppy and loose.
Roll your shoulders back and gently move your head from side to side. »
E ncourage self-practice.
Now place one hand on your belly and the other hand on your upper chest. I
want you to imagine you have a balloon in your stomach and when you “Try on your own for one minute. This is something you can practice
breathe in you are going to blow that balloon up, so your stomach will on your own.”
expand. And when you breathe out, the air in the balloon will also go out,
so your stomach will flatten. Watch me first. I am going to exhale first to
get all the air out of my stomach.” Demonstrate breathing from the stomach –
try to exaggerate the pushing out, and pulling in, of your stomach.
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS 149

150
OTHER SIGNIFICANT MENTAL HEALTH COMPLAINTS

IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG 151

152
IMP
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG
mhGAP-IG implementation process
A number of actions are recommended to programme planners to
implement this guide in non-specialized health care settings. This can
be summarized in the following diagram which includes a number
of essential actions and continuous activities. This module provides IMPLEMENTATION
an overview of the mhGAP-IG implementation process.
PLAN
3
3
4 ADAPTATION
PROVISION OF
4
TREATMENT & CARE
INTERSECTORAL
COLLABORATION
1 ESTABLISH mhGAP-IG SITUATION 2 2
IMPLEMENTATION TEAM ANALYSIS ADVOCACY &
AWARENESS RAISING
5 TRAINING &
SUPERVISION
6
MONITORING &
EVALUATION

11. Establish mhGAP-IG 2 Situation analysis 3 mhGAP-IG implementation plan
implementation team
The main objective of the situation analysis is to inform the Based on the situation analysis, develop a plan for mhGAP-IG
planning, adaptation and implementation process regarding implementation to answer the following questions:
It may be necessary to have one or more teams depending
resources and needs for MNS conditions. This process involves
upon the geographical area/regions to be covered.
WHERE
desk reviews, e.g. checking WHO Mental Health Atlas Country
Clearly delineate the purpose and terms of reference of the Profile, the WHO Assessment Instrument for Mental Health
Where will mhGAP-IG be implemented, (e.g. facilities,
implementation teams and develop a work plan for each of Systems (AIMS) report or already existing assessments, and
districts, cities)?
the team/s members. One of the key functions of this team is interviews and group discussions with multiple stakeholders to
to oversee the implementation process. answer the following questions: WHEN
Build upon any existing body or group rather than What kind of needs and resource assessments must be done When will each of the mhGAP-IG activities be implemented,
establishing a new one, for example, a health committee first? What is already known? (e.g. timeline for adaptation, training of trainers, training
or community advisory group. Sometimes there is more activities, supervision and advocacy activities)?
What are the national policies pertaining to mental health,
than one group. Merging groups or establishing a new
the staff capacities in the country/region and organizations
group with the participation of members from all of them WHAT
providing mental health services?
could be a solution.
What are the resources needed and available for mhGAP-IG
What are the belief systems and care seeking behaviours
Members of the implementation team should include at least implementation, including financial and human resources
around mental health in the country/region?
one member of each of the following categories: civil society and infrastructure, (e.g. facilities, medication supply)?
and service users, policy makers, actual and potential financial What potential barriers exist in relation to implementation
supporters or donors, programme managers, service providers of mhGAP-IG exist, for example, stigma and discrimination WHO
and communication officers. towards people with MNS conditions, national health
Who will be trained and what knowledge and skills do they
priorities that supersede MNS conditions, etc.
Form smaller action groups or task forces to focus on specific already have, (e.g. the skills and knowledge that PHC nurses
activities, e.g. an action group to implement training and physicians already have), and who will be responsbile for
activities and another to implement advocacy & awareness each activity, (e.g. who will train and supervise)?
raising activities. Always clearly identify the functions of a
HOW
task force and the role of each of its member.
How can you improve communication and referral pathways
across different levels of the system, while also introducing
the new service?
How can you collect data on mhGAP-IG implementation
activities and integrate it into health information system
indicators?
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG 153

154
IMP
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG
14. Adaptation 15. mhGAP-IG training & supervision
mhGAP-IG adaptation is the process of deciding on and Method of mhGAP-IG adaptation: An important aspect of mhGAP-IG implementation is the
producing the changes needed in the mhGAP-IG, its training training of healthcare providers working in non-specialist
materials, monitoring & evaluation (M&E) tools and other tools Organize a workshop with a group of different stakeholders settings to deliver interventions as front line personnel, along
to fit a particular country or district context. to contextualize and adapt the mhGAP-IG, its training with mechanisms to ensure their continued support and super-
materials and M&E and other tools. vision. Although the intervention guide is to be implemented
Purpose of mhGAP-IG adaptation: primarily by non-specialists, it requires coordinated effort by
Include experts representing relevant disciplines, (e.g.
specialists and public health experts to ensure its optimum
psychiatry, addiction, neurology, paediatrics, social work
To make it feasible to implement the guide including its delivery.
and psychology), people representing different levels of
assessment and management components through the local
general health care, (e.g. public health practitioners, primary The objective of mhGAP-IG training is to teach non-specialist
health system.
health care providers, family medicine specialists, nurses, healthcare providers the skills and knowledge needed to assess
pharmacists, health information system practitioners), and manage people with priority MNS conditions. The duration
To ensure that the guide is acceptable in the local socio-
service users and policy makers. of training depends on the local adaptations made, as well as on
cultural context.
the knowledge and skills that non-specialist healthcare providers
Use the situation analyses conducted for the regions in
To use local terms to improve communication with users already have. Usually this training process takes several full days
which mhGAP-IG will be implemented.
and carers. and can be conducted face-to-face or via e-learning, depending
Ensure that the adaptation process is in line with national on feasibility.
To clarify referral pathways.
documents, (e.g. the national health policy, legislation and
The training structure can follow a cascade plan with two levels:
To make materials consistent with relevant national plan, clinical protocols and guidelines used in general/
a master facilitator trains ‘trainers’ who then train the non-
treatment guidelines and policies, as appropriate. primary health care and the national medicine list).
specialist front-line healthcare providers.
To provide a basis for the development of appropriate
training programmes and tools.
To ensure M&E indicators are in line with national health
information systems.

mhGAP-IG train the trainers: mhGAP-IG support & supervison: Ensure that the supply of medicine, medical equipment and
other support systems for mhGAP-IG implementation are
The objective is to ensure that trainers are skilled and confident Participants in the mhGAP-IG training course (mhGAP-IG operational.
trainees) are usually non-specialized health care staff working in
in their ability to train non-specialist healthcare providers and
Demonstrate and encourage respectful, non-judgmental
primary or secondary health care clinics/hospitals. They require
act as informed resources for these providers.
attitudes and ethical treatment that promotes and protects
ongoing help to transfer what they have learned in training to
the human rights of individuals with MNS conditions.
their clinical practices. Supervision is seen as part of the
mhGAP-IG trainers/supervisors should have the
following characteristics: continuum of education required to create competent mhGAP Provide support to healthcare providers experiencing stress.
health care providers. Support and supervision not only aims
Be specialists in MNS health care (psychiatrist, psychiatric to assist mhGAP-IG trainees to deliver improved mental health
nurse, neurologist, etc.), physicians or nurses trained and care (clinical supervision) but also provides support in the work
experienced in managing MNS conditions using mhGAP-IG, environment related to mhGAP-IG implementation (administra-
and/or existing supervisors for the general health system. tive and program supervision).
Have clinical skills and experience in mental health and/or
management of MNS conditions.
Specific goals of support & supervision:
Have skills and experience with administrative aspects
of managing MNS conditions, including record keeping, Assist in the transfer of skills and knowledge from the
follow-up and referral. mhGAP-IG training into clinical practice.
Be good facilitators and problem-solvers. Ensure adequate delivery of mental health interventions that
in line with mhGAP-IG and address areas for further skills
Available for support and supervision, including regular
development.
supervisory visits.
Identify and assist with problems faced by mhGAP-IG
The training agenda: trainees in managing complicated clinical situations.
The trainers are expected to conduct future mhGAP-IG training
Help motivate non-specialized health care workers to provide
courses and provide support and supervision to health care
good quality care for people with MNS conditions.
providers. Apart from training in the assessment and manage-
ment of people with MNS conditions, as described in the Ensure necessary records and administrative procedures
mhGAP-IG, they will learn about methods of training, planning for MNS conditions, such as referrals and follow-up, are
of curricula, methods of supervision and quality assurance. established and/or integrated into existing systems at the
local health care facilities.
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG 155

156
IMP
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG
16. Monitoring & Evaluation
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) can provide information about Evaluate the mhGAP-IG implementation process, identify There are four main groups of medications that target priority
whether a programme is making a difference and for whom; it can successes as well as needs for improvement and update the MNS conditions mentioned in this guide:
identify programme areas that are on target or aspects of a pro- situation analysis.
antipsychotics for psychotic disorders;
gramme that need to be adjusted. Information gained from M&E
can demonstrate to programme implementers and funders that drugs used in mood disorders (depressive or bipolar);
In addition to the six actions described above, there are three
their investments are paying off. M&E provides vital information
continuous activities that form an essential part of mhGAP-IG anticonvulsants/antiepileptics;
for learning from past experiences, improving service delivery,
implementation. These are described in the sections below.
planning, resource allocation and demonstrating results as part medications used for management of substance withdrawal,
of accountability to key stakeholders. The phrase, “what gets intoxication or dependence .
A. PROVISION OF TREATMENT AND CARE:
measured gets done,” summarises the importance of monitoring
The experiences of many countries demonstrate that
& evaluation in programme planning and implementation. The mhGAP-IG recommends a number of pharmacological and
improvements in the supply and use of medicines are possible.
psychological interventions be provided by non-specialised health
Access of populations to essential medicines are determined by:
M&E involves planning, coordinating, collecting, analysing care providers. It recommends, for example, problem solving
(i) a rational selection of medicines; (ii) making prices affordable;
and using data from national, district and local levels, including therapy (PST) and Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) for adult depression.
(iii) ensuring sustainable financing; and (iv) availability of reliable
health facilities and mhGAP-IG facilitators, trainees and super- WHO has developed psychological interventions in simplified
health and supply systems.
visors; therefore, it will be helpful if the mhGAP-IG implemen- form. These are scalable interventions and their delivery requires
tation team appoints a M&E coordinator or sub-committee a less intense level of specialist human resource use. It means
to plan and carry this out. that the intervention has been modified to use fewer resources B. ADVOCACY AND AWARENESS RAISING:
compared with conventional psychological interventions and that
Some examples of indicators that can be used to monitor people with and without previous training in mental health care Mental health advocacy uses information in deliberate and
mhGAP-IG implementation are: facility-level indicators, e.g. number can effectively deliver low-intensity versions of PST and IPT as strategic ways to influence others to create change. It involves
of non-specialist health care providers trained on mhGAP-IG, long as they are trained and supervised. Examples of WHO the promotion of the needs and rights of people with mental
number of support and supervisory visits to each health facility scalable psychological interventions manuals which are part of disorders, as well as that of the general population. Advocacy is
implementing mhGAP-IG; and system-level indicators, e.g. number the mhGAP package include: the WHO Problem Management different from education. Education informs and helps create
of health facilities using mhGAP-IG to assess and manage persons Therapy PM+ manual, the WHO Interpersonal Therapy manual understanding of an issue. Advocacy, on the other hand, aims to
with MNS conditions, number of health facilities with an (IPT), the WHO Thinking Healthy manual for maternal depression, persuade. This is done through requests and calls for specific
uninterrupted supply of essential medicines for MNS conditions. and the WHO Parental Skills training manual. actions. One basic principle is that advocacy is only effective
when the target audience is asked to do something. Mobilizing
Ensure that the indicators are part of the national health Essential medicines can be used to treat symptoms of MNS people means asking them to become part of the solution.
information system. Collecting data using indicators will assist in conditions, to shorten the course of many disorders, reduce
monitoring mhGAP-IG. They will also assist in reporting on disability and prevent relapse. Essential medicines are part of the
national mental health every two years to the WHO Mental WHO Model Lists of Essential Medicines. Access to essential
Health Atlas, to monitor progress on implementation of the medicines is a component of “the right to [the highest attainable
Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2020. standard of] health.”

Examples of advocacy actions C. NETWORKING AND INTERSECTORAL To facilitate efficient collaboration between these
COLLABORATION: groups, it is important to:
Advocacy actions within the general population:
Ensure that members of the mhGAP-IG implementation
mhGAP-IG implementation requires collaboration amongst
Include and mobilize people with MNS conditions and their team have clear roles and functions.
various sectors and stakeholders, such as:
carers in the advocacy actions. Ensure that the community
Prepare a list of resources and benefits to help non-
has direct and positive social contact with people with
Specialist and non-specialist health services and
specialized health care staff make meaningful links for those
MNS conditions.
care-providers: e.g. psychologists, community health
with mhGAP priority conditions, their carers and other family
Use the media to increase awareness of mental health issues, workers, social workers,inpatient or outpatient service
members by gathering information from the situational
e.g. through public announcements, magazine features and providers, outreach care workers.
analysis and regularly updating the list based on new
announcement at health centers, while at same time
Service users: e.g. groups or individuals living with the information.
emphasizing the need for responsible reporting, particularly
same condition, family members with the same condition or
regarding suicide.
caring for someone with the same condition (after seeking
Provide education about mental health issues in public consent from all those involved).
places (e.g. schools, health care centers).
Family and friends: Identify the person’s prior social
Hold public events and lectures around mental health themes.
activities that, if reinitiated, would have the potential for
providing direct or indirect psychological and social support
Advocacy actions with health and mental health workers: (e.g. family gatherings, outings with friends, visiting neighbors,
social activities at work sites, sports, community activities)
Promote an understanding of the importance of community
and encourage the person to resume these activities.
care, community participation and human rights of people
affected with MNS conditions.
Informal community supports: e.g. spiritual groups,
Provide adequate training and support to mental health and saving groups, recreational groups, women groups, youth
general health workers. support groups, cultural groups, self-help groups, helplines.
Education and employment: e.g. schools, education, income
generating or vocational training programmmes. Specifically,
suicide prevention programmes in school settings that include
mental health awareness training and skills training to reduce
suicide attempts and suicide deaths among adolescent students.
Non-governmental organizations: e.g. legal aid, child
protection services, gender based violence programmes or
psychosocial support programmes.
Government services and benefits: e.g. public justice systems,
child welfare, pension, disability, transportation discounts.
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG 157

158
IMP
IMPLEMENTATION OF mhGAP-IG

GLOSSARY
159

160
GLOSSARY
TERM DEFINITION TERM DEFINITION
Activities of daily living A concept of functioning – activities of daily living are basic activities Ataxia Failure of muscular coordination. People with ataxia have problems
(ADLs) that are necessary for independent living, including eating, bathing and with coordination because parts of the nervous system that control
toileting. This concept has several assessment tools to determine an movement and balance are affected. Ataxia may affect the fingers,
individual’s ability to perform the activity with or without assistance. hands, arms, legs, body, speech, and eye movements.
Agitation Marked restlessness and excessive motor activity, accompanied by Autism spectrum An umbrella term that covers conditions such as autism, childhood
anxiety. disorders disintegration disorder and Asperger’s syndrome.
Agranulocytosis A blood disorder in which there is an absence of granulocytes Autonomy The perceived ability to control, cope with and make personal
(a type of white blood cell). It is an acute condition involving a severe decisions about how one lives on a daily basis, according to one’s
and dangerous leukopenia, also known as drug-induced secondary own rules and preferences.
agranulocytosis.
Behavioural activation Psychological treatment that focuses on improving mood by engaging
Akathisia A subjective sense of restlessness, often accompanied by observed again in activities that are task-oriented and used to be enjoyable, in
excessive movements (e.g. fidgety movements of the legs, rocking spite of current low mood. It may be used as a stand-alone treatment,
from foot to foot, pacing, inability to sit or stand still). and it is also a component of cognitive behavioural therapy.
Akinesia The absence or lack of voluntary movement. A state of difficulty in Bereavement A process of loss, grief and recovery, usually associated with death.
initiating movements or changing from one motor pattern to another
Cerebrovascular A sudden disturbance of cerebral function attributable to vascular
that is associated with Parkinson’s disease.
accident disease, principally thrombosis, haemorrhage, or embolism. See stroke.
Altered mental status A changed level of awareness or mental state that falls short of
Cognitive Mental processes associated with thinking. These include reasoning,
unconsciousness which is often induced by substance intake or other
remembering, judgement, problem-solving and planning.
mental or neurological conditions. Examples include confusion and
disorientation. See delirium and confusional state. Cognitive behavioural Psychological treatment that combines cognitive components (aimed at
therapy (CBT) thinking differently, for example through identifying and challenging
Alzheimer's disease A primary degenerative cerebral disease of unknown etiology in
unrealistic negative thoughts) and behavioural components (aimed at
the majority of cases with characteristic neuropathological and
doing things differently, for example by helping the person to do more
neurochemical features. The disorder is usually insidious in onset and
rewarding activities).
develops slowly but steadily over a period of several years.
Comorbid, comorbidity Describing diseases or disorders that exist simultaneously.
Anticholinergic side- Anticholinergic medicines block the effects of acetylcholine at
effects muscarinic receptors. Anticholinergic effects include dryness of the Confidentiality Privacy in the context of privileged communication (such as patient
mouth, urinary frequency or retention, palpitations and sinus doctor consultations) and medical records is safeguarded.
tachycardia.
Confusion, A state of impaired consciousness associated with acute or chronic
Aplastic anaemia A disease characterized by the inability of blood stem cells to confusional state cerebral organic disease. Clinically it is characterized by
generate new mature cells. This disease is also characterised by low disorientation, slowness of mental processes with scanty association
levels of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. This disease of ideas, apathy, lack of initiative, fatigue, and poor attention. In mild
may present with pallor, fatigue, dizziness, increased risk of infection confusional states, rational responses and behaviour may be
or increased bruising or bleeding. provoked by examination but more severe degrees of the disorder
render the individual unable to retain contact with the environment.

TERM DEFINITION TERM DEFINITION
Contingency A structured method of rewarding certain desired behaviours, such Disorganized behaviour Behaviour including posture, gait, and other activity that is unpredictable or
management therapy as attending treatment and avoiding harmful substance use. Rewards not goal-directed (e.g., shouting at strangers on the street).
for desired behaviours are reduced over time as the natural rewards
Distractibility Difficulty concentrating and focusing on tasks; attention is easily
become established.
diverted by extraneous stimuli.
Convulsion, convulsive Clinical or subclinical disturbances of cortical function due to a
Dystonia Sustained muscle contraction or involuntary movements that can
movement sudden, abnormal, excessive, and disorganized discharge of brain
lead to fixed abnormal postures. See tardive dyskinesia.
cells (see seizure). Clinical manifestations include abnormal motor,
sensory and psychic phenomena. Eclampsia Any condition affecting pregnant women, characterized by seizure or
convulsions newly arising in pregnancy. The condition is often associated
Delirium Transient fluctuating mental state characterized by disturbed
with pregnancy-induced hypertension, convulsions, seizure, anxiety,
attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift
epigastric pain, severe headache, blurred vision, proteinuria, and
attention) and awareness (i.e., reduced orientation to the
oedema that may occur during pregnancy, labour, or the puerperium.
environment) that develops over a short period of time and tends to
fluctuate during the course of a day. It is accompanied by (other) Elevated mood A positive mood state typically characterized by increased energy and
disturbances of perception, memory, thinking, emotions or self-esteem which may be out of proportion to the individual's life
psychomotor functions. It may result from acute organic causes such circumstances.
as infections, medication, metabolic abnormalities, substance Extrapyramidal Abnormalities in muscle movement, mostly caused by antipsychotic
intoxication or substance withdrawal. side-effects / symptoms medication. These include muscle tremors, stiffness, spasms and/or
Delusion Fixed belief that is contrary to available evidence. It cannot be (EPS) akathisia.
changed by rational argument and is not accepted by other members
Family therapy Counselling that entails multiple (usually more than six) planned
of the person’s culture or subculture (i.e., it is not an aspect of
sessions over a period of months. It should be delivered to individual
religious faith).
families or groups of families, and should include the person living
Detoxification The process by which an individual is withdrawn from the effects of a with mental illness, if feasible. It has supportive and educational or
psychoactive substance. Also referring to a clinical procedure, the treatment functions. It often includes negotiated problem-solving or
withdrawal process is carried out in a safe and effective manner, such crisis management work.
that withdrawal symptoms are minimized.
Fetal alcohol syndrome Fetal alcohol syndrome is a malformation syndrome caused by
Disability Any restriction or lack (resulting from an impairment) of ability to maternal consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. It is characterized
perform an activity in the manner, or within the range, considered to by prenatal and/or postnatal growth deficiency and a unique cluster
be normal for a human being. The term disability reflects the of minor facial anomalies that presents across all ethnic groups, is
consequences of impairment in terms of functional performance and identifiable at birth, and does not diminish with age. Affected children
activity by the individual. present severe central nervous system abnormalities including:
microcephaly, cognitive and behavioural impairment (intellectual
Disinhibited behaviour, Lack of restraint manifested in disregard for social conventions,
disability, deficit in general cognition, learning and language,
disinhibition impulsivity and poor risk assessment. It can affect motor, emotional,
executive function, visual-spatial processing, memory, and attention).
cognitive and perceptual aspects of a person’s functioning.
Fits Colloquial term for convulsions. See convulsion.
Disorganized / A disturbance in the associative thought process typically manifested
disordered thinking in speech in which the person shifts suddenly from Focal deficits Neurological signs that are observable bodily phenomena or
one topic to another that is unrelated or minimally related to the first. responses suggestive of the localization of a relatively circumscribed
The individual gives no indication of being aware of the lesion of the nervous system.
disconnectedness or illogicality of his or her thinking.
GLOSSARY 161

162
GLOSSARY
TERM DEFINITION TERM DEFINITION
Hallucination False perception of reality: seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling or Irritability, A mood state characterized by being easily annoyed and provoked to
tasting things that are not real. irritable mood anger, out of proportion to the circumstances.
Hepatic Abnormal mental state including drowsiness, confusion or coma Maculopapular rash A rash that consists of both macules (flat (impalpable), circumscribed
encephalopathy caused by liver dysfunction. areas of skin or areas of altered skin colour (e.g. freckles)) and
papules (small raised spots on the skin, often dome-shaped and less
Herbal products A range of folk medicines, many of them empirically discovered
than 5 mm in diameter).
hundreds of years ago to be effective, derived from or consisting of
portions of plants. In many cultures, knowledge about the efficacy of Meningeal irritation Irritation of the layers of tissue that cover the brain and spinal cord,
herbal remedies is carefully preserved and handed on by oral usually caused by an infection.
tradition from one generation to the next.
Meningitis A disease of the meninges (the membranes covering the brain and
Hyperarousal Intense and prolonged autonomic discharge accompanied by a state spinal cord) usually caused by an infection with a bacterial, viral,
of frozen watchfulness and alertness to environmental stimuli. Such fungal, or parasitic source.
responses are seen most frequently in post-traumatic stress disorders
Motivational A structured therapy (lasting 4 or less sessions) to help people with
and often associated with substance use or withdrawal.
enhancement therapy substance use disorders. It involves an approach to motivate change
Hypersensitivity Hypersensitivity reactions are the adverse effects of pharmaceutical by using motivational interviewing techniques i.e. engaging the
reaction formulations (including active drugs and excipients) that clinically person in a discussion about their substance use including perceived
resemble allergy. It belongs to type B adverse drug reactions, which benefits and harms in relation to the persons own values, avoiding
are defined by the WHO as the dose-independent, unpredictable, arguing with the person if there is resistance, encouraging the person
noxious, and unintended response to a medicine taken at a dose to decide for themselves what their goal may be.
normally used in humans. It covers many different clinical phenotypes
Motor twitching See convulsion.
with variable onset and severity.
Myasthenia gravis A disorder of neuromuscular transmission characterized by fatigable
Idiosyncratic reaction Individual, unpredictable, and non-dose-dependent response to any
weakness of cranial and skeletal muscles. Clinical manifestations may
substance: drowsiness or euphoria, flushing, carpopedal spasms,
include fluctuating diplopia and ptosis, and fatigable weakness of
apnoea, etc.
facial, bulbar, respiratory, and proximal limb muscles.
Informed consent The process by which the health care provider discloses appropriate
Neonatal abstinence Intrauterine exposure to addictive drugs can lead to neonatal
information to a person who can then make a voluntary choice to accept or
syndrome withdrawal symptoms. Withdrawal symptoms are usually
refuse treatment. informed consent includes a discussion of the following
neurological, preventing normal autonomic function. The clinical
elements: the nature of the decision/procedure; reasonable alternatives to
presentation of drug withdrawal is variable and dependent on several
the proposed intervention; the relevant risks, benefits, and uncertainties
factors, such as, the type and dose of drug used, and rate of
related to each alternative; assessment of the person’s understanding, and
metabolism and excretion of the mother and infant.
the acceptance of the intervention by the person.
Neuroinfection Infection involving the brain and/or spinal cord.
Interpersonal therapy Psychological treatment that focuses on the link between depressive
(IPT) symptoms and interpersonal problems, especially those involving Neuroleptic malignant A rare but life-threatening condition caused by antipsychotic
grief, disputes, life changes and social isolation. It is also known as syndrome (NMS) medications, which is characterised by fever, delirium, muscular
Interpersonal Psychotherapy. rigidity and high blood pressure.

TERM DEFINITION TERM DEFINITION
Occupational therapy Therapy designed to help individuals improve their independence in Pruritus Itching; an intense sensation that produces the urge to rub or scratch
daily living activities through rehabilitation, exercises and the use of the skin to obtain relief.
assistive devices. In addition, such therapy provides activities to
Pseudodementia A disorder resembling dementia but not due to organic brain disease
promote growth, self-fulfilment and self-esteem.
and potentially reversible by treatment; can manifest as symptoms of
Oppositional behaviour Markedly defiant, disobedient, provocative or spiteful behaviour that depression in some older adults.
may be manifest in prevailing, persistent angry or irritable mood,
Psychoeducation The process of teaching people with MNS disorders and their carers/
often accompanied by severe temper outbursts or in headstrong,
family members about the nature of the illness, including its likely causes,
argumentative and defiant behaviour.
progression, consequences, prognosis, treatment and alternatives.
Orthostatic Sudden drop of blood pressure that can occur when one changes
QT prolongation A potential medication induced side-effect of ventricular myocardial
hypotension position from lying to sitting or standing up, usually leading to
repolarization characterized by a prolonged QT interval on the
feelings of light-headedness or dizziness. It is not life-threatening.
electrocardiogram (ECG) that can lead to symptomatic ventricular
Parent Skills Training A family of treatment programs that aims to change parenting beha- arrhythmias and an increased risk of sudden cardiac death.
viours and strengthen confidence in adoption of effective parenting
Racing thoughts Rapid thought pattern with tangential movement from one idea to
strategies. It involves teaching parents emotional communication and
the next often associated with mania or other mental illnesses.
positive parent-child interaction skills, and positive reinforcement
methods to improve children/adolescent’s behaviour and functioning. Relapse A return to drinking or other drug use after a period, of abstinence,
often accompanied by reinstatement of dependence symptoms. The
Phaeochromocytoma A neuroendocrine tumour of the medulla of the adrenal glands
term is also used to indicate return of symptoms of MNS disorder
causing symptoms (mainly headaches, palpitations and excess
after a period of recovery.
sweating) and signs (mainly hypertension, weight loss and diabetes)
reflecting the effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine on alpha- and Relaxation training Involves training in techniques such as breathing exercises to elicit
beta-adrenergic receptors. the relaxation response.
Polyneuropathy Disorder and functional disturbance of the peripheral nerves. This Respiratory depression Inadequate slow breathing rate, resulting in insufficient oxygen.
may be manifest as numbness of the extremities, paraesthesia ("pins Common causes include brain injury and intoxication (e.g. due to
and needles" sensations), weakness of the limbs, or wasting of the benzodiazepines).
muscles and loss of deep tendon reflexes. Respite care Provision of temporary health-care facilities to a person normally
Polytherapy Provision of more than one medicine at the same time for the same cared for at home.
condition. Rigidity Resistance to the passive movement of a limb that persists
Porphyria Porphyrias constitute a group of diseases characterized by intermittent throughout its range. It is a symptom of parkinsonism.
neuro-visceral manifestations, cutaneous lesions or by the combination of Saving group A saving activity in which the poor can accumulate a large amount of
both. Clinical signs of the disease usually appear in adulthood, but some money quickly by pooling their savings in a common fund which can
porphyrias affect children. Direct or indirect neurotoxicity may cause then be used by the group or a member of the group for productive
neurological manifestations. investment.
Privacy The state of being free from unsanctioned intrusion. For example, Seizure Episode of brain malfunction due to disturbances of cortical function
personal privacy in daily living activities (e.g. for clients in residential resulting in sudden, abnormal, excessive, and disorganized discharge
facilities) or confidential health records. of brain cells. Clinical manifestations include abnormal motor,
Problem-solving Psychological treatment that involves the systematic use of problem iden- sensory and psychic phenomena.
counselling tification and problem-solving techniques over a number of sessions. Self-harm Intentional self-inflicted poisoning or injury to oneself, which may or
may not have a fatal intent or outcome.
GLOSSARY 163

164
GLOSSARY
TERM DEFINITION TERM DEFINITION
Serotonin syndrome Characterised by an excess of serotonin in the central nervous Suicidal thoughts / Thoughts, ideas, or ruminations about the possibility of ending one's
system, associated with the use of various agents, including selective ideation life, ranging from thinking that one would be better off dead to
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Serotonin syndrome may result formulation of elaborate plans.
in muscle rigidity, myoclonus, agitation, confusion, hyperthermia,
Tardive dyskinesia This is dystonia characterized by twisting and sustained muscle
hyperreflexia as well as dysautonomic symptoms, with a risk of
spasms that affect regions of the head, neck, and occasionally, the
shock with low peripheral vascular resistance, seizures, coma,
back. It may not improve after stopping the antipsychotic medicine.
rhabdomyolysis and/or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Temper tantrum An emotional outburst from a child or those in emotional distress.
Slurred speech Speech with indistinctive pronunciation.
Thrombocytopenia Abnormally low number of platelets in the blood. This disease may
Social network A construct of analytical sociology referring to the characteristics of
present with increased bruising or haemorrhaging. Confirmation is by
the social linkages among people as a means of understanding their
identification of decreased platelet count in a blood sample.
behaviour, rather than focusing on the attributes of individuals.
Toxic epidermal Life-threatening skin peeling that is usually caused by a reaction to a
Social withdrawal Inability of a person to engage in age appropriate activities or
necrolysis medicine or infection. It is similar to but more severe than Stevens-
interactions with his or her peers or family members.
Johnson syndrome.
Spider naevus A cluster of minute red blood vessels visible under the skin, occurring
Traditional Healing A system of treatment modalities based on indigenous knowledge of
typically during pregnancy or as a symptom of certain diseases (e.g.
different cultures pertaining to healing.
cirrhosis or acne rosacea).
Transient ischaemic A transient episode of acute focal neurological dysfunction caused by
Spinal abscess A condition of the spinal cord, caused by an infection with a bacterial,
attack (TIA) focal ischemia of the brain or retina, without demonstrated acute
viral, or fungal source. This condition is characterized by a focal accumu-
infarction in the clinically relevant area of the brain. Symptoms should
lation of purulent material within the spinal cord. This condition may
resolve completely within 24 hours.
present with fever, back pain and neurological deficits. Transmission is
through haematogenous spread of the infectious agent. Tremor Trembling or shaking movements, usually of the fingers, that is an
involuntary oscillation of a body part.
Status epilepticus Defined as 5 min or more of continuous clinical and/or electrographic
seizure activity or recurrent seizure activity without recovery (returning Vitamin K deficiency Lack of vitamin K can cause severe bleeding in newborn babies
to baseline) between seizures; it can be convulsive or non-convulsive. disease of the newborn usually immediately after birth but sometimes up to 6 months of age.
Bleeding may be cutaneous, gastro-intestinal, intracranial or
Stevens-Johnson Life-threatening skin condition characterized by painful skin peeling,
mucosal. Maternal intake of antiepiletic medicines is one of its
syndrome ulcers, blisters and crusting of mucocutaneous tissues such as mouth,
causes.
lips, throat, tongue, eyes and genitals, sometimes associated with
fever. It is most often caused by severe reaction to medications, Wandering People living with dementia feel the urge to walk about and in some
especially antiepileptic medicines. cases leave their homes. They can often experience problems with
orientation, which may cause them to become lost.
Stigma A distinguishing mark establishing a demarcation between the
stigmatized person and others attributing negative characteristics to
this person. The stigma attached to mental illness often leads to
social exclusion and discrimination and creates an additional burden
for the affected individual.
Stroke See cerebrovascular accident (CVA).

Mental, neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders are highly prevalent,
accounting for a substantial burden of disease and disability globally. In order to
bridge the gap between available resources and the significant need for services, the
World Health Organization launched the Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP).
The objective of mhGAP is to scale-up care and services using evidence-based interventions
for prevention and management of priority MNS conditions. The mhGAP Intervention Guide
version 1.0 for MNS disorders for non-specialist health settings was developed in 2010 as
a simple technical tool to allow for integrated management of priority MNS conditions using
protocols for clinical decision-making.
With uptake in over 90 countries, mhGAP-IG 1.0 version has had widespread success. It is our pleasure to
present mhGAP version 2.0, with updates incorporating new evidence-based guidance, enhanced usability,
and new sections to expand its use by both health care providers as well as programme managers.
It is our hope that this guide will continue to provide the road-map to deliver care and services for people with
MNS disorders around the world and lead us closer to achieving the goal of universal health coverage.
The mhGAP-IG version 2.0 includes the following sections:
E ssential Care & Practice
M aster Chart
Depression
For more information,
Psychoses
please contact:
Epilepsy
Department of Mental Health and Child & Adolescent Mental & Behavioural Disorders
Substance Abuse
Dementia
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20 Disorders due to Substance Use
CH-1211 Geneva 27 Self-harm / Suicide
Switzerland
Other Significant Mental Health Complaints
Email: mhgap-info@who.int Implementation of mhGAP-IG
Website: www.who.int/mental_health/mhgap